

=== Class10_Economics ===

NOTES FOR TEACHERS NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER I: DEVELOPMENT Development has many aspects. The purpose of this chapter is to enable students to understand this idea. They have to understand that people have different perspectives on development and there are ways by which we can arrive at common indicators for development. To do this, we have used situations that they can respond to in an intuitive manner; we have also presented analysis that is more complex and macro in nature. How can countries or states be development indicators is another question that students would read about in this chapter. Economic development can be measured and income is the most common method for measuring development. However, the income method, though useful, has several weaknesses. Hence, we need newer ways of looking at development using indicators of quality of life and environmental It is necessary for you to expect the students to respond actively in the classroom and on a topic such as the above, there would be wide variation in opinion and possibility of debate. Allow students to argue their point of view. At the end of each section there are a few questions and activities. These serve two purposes: first, they recap the ideas discussed in the section and second, they enable better understanding of the themes discussed by bringing the learners closer to their real life situations. There are certain terms used in this chapter that would require clarification   Per Capita Income, Literacy Rate, Infant Mortality Rate, Attendance Ratio, Life Expectancy, Gross Enrolment Ratio, and Human Development Index. Though data pertaining to these terms are provided, these would need further explanation. You may also need to clarify the concept of Purchasing Power Parity that is used to calculate Gross National Income per capita in Table 1.6. It is necessary to keep in mind that these terms are used as an aid to the discussion and not something to be Sources for Information The data for this chapter is taken from reports published by the Government of India (Economic Survey, Reports of the National Family Health Survey and Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy), United Nations Development Programme (Human Development Report) and World Bank (World Development Indicators). Many of these reports are published every year. It may be interesting to look up these reports if they are available in your school library. If not, you may log on to the websites of these institutions (www.budgetindia.nic.in, www.undp.org,www.worldbank.org, The idea of development or progress has always been with us. We have aspirations or desires about what we would like to do and how we would like to live. Similarly, we have ideas about what a country should be like. What are the essential things that we require? Can life be better for all? How should people live together? Can there be more equality? Development involves thinking about these questions and about the ways in which we can work towards achieving these goals. This is a complex task and in this chapter we shall make a beginning at understanding development. You will learn more about these issues in greater depth in higher classes. Also, you will find answers to many of these questions not just in economics but also in your course in history and political science. This is because the way we live today is influenced by the past. We can t desire for change without being aware of this. In the same way, it is only through a democratic political process that these hopes and possibilities can be achieved in  Without me they cannot develop... in this system I cannot develop!  Let us try to imagine what development or progress is likely to mean to different persons listed in Table 1.1. What are their aspirations? You will find that some columns are partially filled. Try to complete the table. You can also add any other category of persons. Category of Person Landless rural labourers Prosperous farmers from Punjab Farmers who depend only on rain for growing crops A rural woman from a land Urban unemployed youth A boy from a rich urban family A girl from a rich urban family An adivasi from Narmada valley WHAT DEVELOPMENT PROMISES   DIFFERENT PEOPLE, DIFFERENT GOALS Having filled Table 1.1, let us now examine it. Do all of these persons have the same notion of development or progress? Most likely not.  Each one of them seeks different things. They seek things that are most important for them, i.e., that which can fulfil their aspirations or desires. In fact, at times, two persons or groups of persons may seek things TABLE 1.1 DEVELOPMENTAL GOALS OF DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF PERSONS Developmental Goals / Aspirations More days of work and better wages; local school is able to provide quality education for their children; there is no social discrimination and they too can become leaders in the village. Assured a high family income through higher support prices for their crops and through hardworking and cheap labourers; they should be able to settle their children abroad. She gets as much freedom as her brother and is able to decide what she wants to do in life. She is able to pursue her YOU WANT A CAR CAR? THE WAY OUR COUNTRY IS SET UP ALL YOU CAN HOPE FOR IS MAY BE TO ONE DAY OWN THE RICKSHAW YOU PULL! which are conflicting.  A girl expects as much freedom and opportunity as her brother, and that he also shares in the household work. Her brother may not like this.  Similarly, to get more electricity, industrialists may want more dams.  But this may submerge the land and disrupt the lives of people who are displaced   such as tribals. They might resent this and may prefer small check dams or tanks to irrigate their land. So, two things are quite clear: one, different persons can have different developmental goals and two, what may be development for one may not be development for the other. It may even be destructive for the other. raising the height Sarovar Dam on INCOME AND OTHER GOALS If you go over Table 1.1 again, you will notice one common thing: what people desire are regular work, better wages, and decent price for their crops or other products that they produce. In other words, they want more Besides seeking more income, one- way or the other, people also seek things like equal treatment, freedom, security, and respect of others. They resent discrimination. All these are important goals. In fact, in some cases, these may be more important than more income or more consumption because material goods are not all that you need to live. Money, or material things that one can buy with it, is one factor on which our life depends. But the quality of our life also depends on non-material things mentioned above.  If it is not obvious to you, then just think of the role of your friends in your life. You may desire their friendship.  Similarly, there are many things that are not easily measured but they mean a lot to our lives. These are often ignored. DON T WANT TO 1.  Why do different persons have different notions of development? Which of the following explanations is more important and why? Because people are different. Because life situations of persons are different. 2. Do the following two statements mean the same? Justify your answer. People have different developmental goals. People have conflicting developmental goals. 3. Give some examples where factors other than income are important aspects of our lives. 4. Explain some of the important ideas of the above section in your own words. LET S WORK THESE OUT However, it will be wrong to conclude that what cannot be measured is not Consider another example. If you get a job in a far off place, before accepting it you would try to consider many factors, apart from income, such as facilities for your family, working atmosphere, or opportunity to learn. In another case, a job may give you less pay but may offer regular employment that enhances your sense of security. Another job, however, may offer high pay but no job security and also leave no time for your family. This will reduce your sense of security and freedom. Similarly, for development, people look at a mix of goals. It is true that if women are engaged in paid work, their dignity in the household and society increases. However, it is also the case that if there is respect for women there would be more sharing of housework and a greater acceptance of women working outside. A safe and secure environment may allow more women to take up a variety of jobs or run Hence, the developmental goals that people have are not only about better income but also about other important things in life. If, as we have seen above, individuals seek different goals, then their notion of national development is also likely to be different. Discuss among yourselves on what India should do Most likely, you would find that different students in the class have given different answers to the above question. In fact, you might yourself think of many different answers and not be too sure of any of these. It is very important to keep in mind that different persons could have different as well as conflicting notions of a country s development. However, can all the ideas be considered equally important? Or, if there are conflicts how does one decide? What would be a fair and just path for all?  We also have to think whether there is a better way of doing things. Would the idea benefit a large number of people or only a small group?  National development means thinking about these questions. Discuss the following situations: 1. Look at the picture on the right. What should be the developmental goals for such an area? 2. Read this newspaper report and answer the questions that follow: LET S WORK THESE OUT If even the idea of what constitutes development can be varied and conflicting, then certainly there can be differences about ways of developing.  If you know of any such controversy, try to find out arguments advanced by different people. You may do so by talking to different persons or you may find it from newspapers and television. (i) Who are the people who benefited and who did not? (ii) What should be the developmental goal for this country? 3. What can be some of the developmental goals for your village, town or locality? A vessel dumped 500 tonnes of liquid toxic wastes into open-air dumps in a city and in the surrounding sea. This happened in a city called Abidjan in Ivory Coast, a country in Africa. The fumes from the highly toxic waste caused nausea, skin rashes, fainting, diarrhoea etc. After a month seven persons were dead, twenty in hospital and twenty six thousand treated for symptoms of poisoning. A multinational company dealing in petroleum and metals had contracted a local company of the Ivory Coast to dispose the toxic waste from You might ask if development can mean different things, how come some countries are generally called developed and others under- developed?  Before we come to this, let us consider another question. When we compare different things, they could have similarities as well as differences. Which aspects do we use to compare them? Let us look at students in the class itself.  How do we compare different students?  They differ in their height, health, talents and interests. The healthiest student may not be the most studious one. The most intelligent student may not be the friendliest one.  So, how do we compare students? The criterion we may use depends on the purpose of comparison.  We use different criterion to choose a sports team, a debate team, a music team or a team to organise a picnic.  Still, if for some purpose, we have to choose the criterion for the all-round progress of children in the class, how shall we Usually we take one or more important characteristics of persons and compare them based on these characteristics.  Of course, there can be differences about what are important characteristics that should form the basis of comparison: friendliness and spirit of cooperation, creativity or marks This is true of development too. For comparing countries, their income is considered to be one of the most important attributes. Countries with higher income are more developed than others with less income. This is based on the understanding that more income means more of all things that human beings need.  Whatever people like, and should have, they will be able to get with greater income. So, greater income itself is considered to be one Now, what is the income of a country? Intuitively, the income of the country is the income of all the residents of the country.  This gives us the total income of the country. However, for comparison between countries, total income is not such an useful measure. Since, countries have different populations, comparing total income will not tell us what an average person is likely to earn. Are people in one country better off than others in a different country? Hence, we compare the average income which is the total income of the country divided by its total population. The average income is also called per capita income. In World Development Reports, brought out by the World Bank, this criterion is used in classifying countries. Countries with per capita income of US$ 63,400 per annum and above in 2023, are called high income or rich countries and those with per capita income of about US$ 2400 or less are called low-income countries. India comes in the category of low middle income countries because its per capita income in 2023 was just about US$ 10030 per annum. The rich countries, excluding countries of Middle East and certain other small countries, are generally called HOW TO COMPARE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES Monthly incomes of citizens assured of being its fifth citizen but if it is a lottery that decides our citizenship number then perhaps most of us will prefer to live in country A. Even though both the countries have identical average income, country A is preferred because it has more equitable distribution.  In this country people are neither very rich nor extremely poor. On the other hand most citizens in country B are poor and one person is extremely rich. Hence, while average income is useful for comparison it does not tell us how this income is distributed among 1. Give three examples where an average is used for comparing situations. 2. Why do you think average income is an important criterion for development? Explain. 3. Besides size of per capita income, what other property of income is important in comparing two or more societies? 4. Suppose records show that the average income in a country has been increasing over a period of time. From this, can we conclude that all sections of the economy have become better? Illustrate your answer with an example. 5. From the text, find out the per capita income level of about 10-15 low-income countries as per World Development Reports. 6. Write a paragraph on your notion of what should India do, or achieve, to become a LET S WORK THESE OUT While  averages  are useful for comparison, they also hide disparities Will you be equally happy to live in both these countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps some of us may like to live in country B if we are For example, let us consider two countries, A and B.  For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed that they have only five citizens each.  Based on data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average income for both the countries. income for both the countries. income for both the countries. income for both the countries. income for both the countries. TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO COUNTRY WITH NO RICH AND NO POOR COUNTRY WITH RICH AND POOR individual aspirations and goals, we found that people not only think of better income but also have goals such as security, respect for others, equal treatment, freedom, etc. in mind., when we think of a nation or a region, we may besides average income, think of other equally INCOME AND OTHER CRITERIA What could these attributes be? Let us examine this through an example. Table 1.3 gives the per capita income of Haryana, Kerala  and Bihar., these figures are of Per Capita Net State Domestic Product at Current Prices for 2021 22. Let us ignore what this complicated term exactly means. Roughly, we can take it to be the per capita income of the state. We find that of the three, Haryana has the highest per capita TABLE 1.4 SOME COMPARATIVE DATA ON HARYANA, KERALA  AND BIHAR TABLE 1.3 PER CAPITA INCOME OF SELECT STATES Per Capita Income for 2021 22 (in Rs) income and Bihar is at the bottom. This means that, on an average, a person in Haryana earned Rs 2,64,729 in one year whereas, on an average, a person in Bihar earned only around Rs 47,500. So, if per capita income were to be used as the measure of development, Haryana will be considered the most developed and Bihar the least developed state of the three. Now, let us look at certain other data pertaining to these states given in Table 1.4. Source: Economic Survey 2020 21, P.A 29. Literacy Rate % Net Attendance Ratio (per 100 persons) secondary stage (aged 15 17 years) 2017 18 Sources: Economic Survey 2023 24, National Sample Survey Organisation (Report No. 585), National Statistical Office, Government of India; National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5) 2019-21 IIPS, Mumbai. Explanation of some of the terms used in this table: Infant Mortality Rate (or IMR) indicates the number of children that die before the age of  one year  as a proportion of 1000 live children born in that particular year. Literacy Rate measures the proportion of literate population in the 7-and-above age group. Net Attendance Ratio is the total number of children of age group of 15-17 years attending school as a percentage of total number of children in the same age group. Rate per 1,000 live births (2020) What does this table show?  The first column of the table shows that in Kerala, out of 1000 children born, 6 died before completing one year of age but in Haryana the proportion of children dying within one year of birth was 28, which is nearly three times more than that of Kerala. On the other hand, the per capita income of Haryana is more than that of Kerala as shown in Table 1.3. Just think of how dear you are to your parents, think of how every one is so happy when a child is born.  Now, try to think of parents whose children die before they even celebrate their first birthday. How painful it must be to these parents?  Next, note the year to which this data pertains. This was during 2018.  So we are not talking of old times; it is 70 years after independence when our metro cities are full of high rise buildings and shopping malls! How is it that the average person in Haryana has more income than the average person in Kerala but lags behind in these crucial areas? The reason is   money in your pocket cannot buy all the goods and services that you may need to live well.  So, income by itself is not a completely adequate indicator of material goods and services that citizens are able to use. For example, normally, your money cannot buy you a pollution-free environment or ensure that you get unadulterated medicines, unless you can afford to shift to a community that already has all these things.  Money may also not be able to protect you from infectious diseases, unless the whole of your community takes preventive steps. The problem does not end with Infant Mortality Rate. The last column of table 1.4 shows that about one-third of the children aged 15 17 years in Bihar are not attending school in secondary classes. This means that if you went to school in Bihar nearly one-third of your class friends would be missing. Those who could have been in school are not there! If this had happened to you, you would not be able to read what you are reading now Actually for many of the important things in life the best way, also the cheapest way, is to provide these goods and services collectively. Just think   will it be cheaper to have collective security for the whole locality or for each house to have its own security staff?  What if no one, other than you, in your village or locality is interested in studying? W ould you be able to study? Not unless your parents could afford to send you to some private school elsewhere.  So you are actually able to study because many other children also want to study and because many people believe that the government should open schools and provide other. Even now, in many areas, children, particularly girls, are not able to go to high school because the government/society has not provided Most babies require basic healthcare The literacy rate for all age groups, including young and old, is _____ for rural males and _____ for rural females. However, it is not just that these many adults could not attend school but that there are _____ who are currently not in (b) It is clear from the table that _____ % of rural girls and _____% of rural boys are not attending school. Therefore, illiteracy among children in the age group 10- 14 is as high as _____% for rural females and _____% for rural males. (c) This high level of illiteracy among __________ age group, even after more than 75 years of our independence, is most disturbing. In many other states also we are nowhere near realisation of the constitutional goal of free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14, which was expected to be achieved Study Table 1.5 carefully and fill in the blanks in the following paragraphs.  For this, you may need to make calculations based on the table. 1. Look at data in Tables 1.3 and 1.4. Is Haryana ahead of Kerala in literacy rate etc., as it is in terms of per capita income? 2. Think of other examples where collective provision of goods and services is cheaper than individual provision. 3. Does availability of good health and educational facilities depend only on amount of money spent by the government on these facilities? What other factors could be relevant? 4. In a study, it was found that in Tamil Nadu, 90 per cent of the people living in rural areas used a ration shop, whereas in West Bengal only 35 per cent of rural people did so. Where would people did better off and why? LET S WORK THESE OUT TABLE 1.5 EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT OF RURAL POPULATION OF UTTAR PRADESH Kerala has a low Infant Mortality Rate because it has adequate provision of basic health and educational facilities.  Similarly some states, the Public Distribution System (PDS) functions well.  Health and nutritional status of people of such states is certainly likely to be Literacy rate for rural population Literacy rate for rural children in age group 10-14 years Percentage of rural children aged 10-14 attending school Once it is realised that even though the level of income is important, yet it is an inadequate measure of the level of development, we begin to think of other criterion. There could be a long list of such criterion but then it would not be so useful. What we need is a small number of the most important things. Health and education indicators, such as the ones we used in comparison of Kerala and Haryana, are among them. Over the past decade or so, health and education indicators have come to be widely used along with income as a measure of development. For instance, Human Development Report published by UNDP compares countries based on the educational levels of the people, their health status and per capita income. It would be interesting to look at certain relevant data regarding India and its neighbours from Human Development Report 2023-24. TABLE 1.6 SOME DATA REGARDING INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS Mean Years of HDI Rank in People aged 25 (2017 PPP $) Source: Human Development Report, 2023 24, United Nations Development Programme, New York. 1. HDI stands for Human Development Index. HDI ranks in above table are out of 193 countries in all. 2. Life Expectancy at birth denotes, as the name suggests, average expected length of life of a person at the time of birth. 3. Per Capita Income is calculated in dollars for all countries so that it can be compared. It is also done in a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of goods and services in any One way to find out if we are properly nourished is to calculate what nutrition scientists call Body Mass Index (BMI). This is easy to calculate. Let each student in the class find out his or her weight and height. Take the weight of each student in kilograms (kg). Then, take the height by drawing up a scale on the wall and measuring accurately with the head straight. Convert the height recorded in centimeters into meters. Divide the weight in kg by the square of the height. The number you get is called BMI. Then, look at the BMI-for-Age tables given on pages 90 91. A student s BMI could be within the normal range or less than that (underweight) or more (obesity). For example, if a girl student is 14 years and 8 month old and the BMI is 15.2, then she is if the BMI of a boy aged 15 years and 6 months is 28, then he is overweight. Discuss the life situation, food and exercise habits of students, in general, without body shaming Isn t it surprising that a small country in our neighbourhood, Sri Lanka, is much ahead of India in every respect and a big country like ours has such a low rank in the world? Table 1.6 also shows that though Nepal and Bangladesh have low per capita income than that of India, yet they are better than India in life expectancy. Many improvements have been suggested in calculating HDI and Suppose for the present that a particular country is quite developed. We would certainly like this level of development to go up further or at least be maintained for future generations. This is obviously desirable.  However, since the second half of the twentieth century, a number of scientists have been warning that the present type, and levels, of development are not sustainable. Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India  Recent evidence suggests that the groundwater is under serious threat of overuse in many parts of the country. About 300 districts have reported a water level decline of over 4 metres during the past 20 years. Nearly one-third of the country is overusing their 60 per cent of the country would be doing the same if the present way of using this resource continues. Groundwater overuse is particularly found in the agriculturally prosperous regions of Punjab and Western U.P., hard rock plateau areas of central and south India, some coastal areas and the rapidly growing urban (a) Why groundwater is overused? (b) Can there be development without overuse? SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT many new components have been added to the Human Development Report but, by pre-fixing Human to Development, it has made it very clear that what is important in development is what is happening to citizens of a country.  It is people, their health, their well being, that is most important. Do you think there are certain other aspects that should be considered in measuring human LET S UNDERSTAND WHY THIS IS SO THROUGH THE  We have not inherited the world from our forefathers   we have borrowed it from our Groundwater is an example of renewable resources. These resources are replenished by nature as in the case of crops and plants. However, even these resources may be overused. For example, in the case of groundwater, if we use more than what is being replenished by rain then we would be overusing this resource. FOR EXAMPLE, CRUDE OIL THAT WE EXTRACT FROM THE EARTH IS A NON- RENEWABLE RESOURCE. HOWEVER WE MAY FIND A SOURCE OF OIL THAT WE DID NOT KNOW OF EARLIER. EXPLORATIONS ARE BEING UNDERTAKEN ALL THE TIME. Example 2: Exhaustion of Look at the following data for crude oil. Number of Years (Thousand Million Barrels) Reserves will last United States of America The table gives an estimate of reserves of crude oil (column1). More important, it also tells us for how many years the stock of crude oil will last if people continue to extract it at the present rate. The reserves would last only 50 years more. This is for the world as a whole. However, different countries face different situations. Countries like India depend on importing oil  from abroad because they do not have enough stocks of their own. If prices of oil increase this becomes a burden for everyone. There are countries like USA which have low reserves and hence want to secure oil through military or economic power. The question of sustainability of development raises many fundamentally new issues about the nature and process of development. (a) Is crude oil essential for the development process in a country? (b) India has to import crude oil. What problems do you anticipate for the country looking at the above situation? Non-renewable resources are those which will get exhausted after a few years of use. We have a fixed stock on earth which cannot be replenished. We do discover new resources that we did not know of earlier. New sources in this way add to the stock. However, over time, even this will get exhausted. TABLE 1.7 CRUDE OIL RESERVES Source: Energy Institute s Statistical Review of World Energy, 2024. 1. Development of a country can generally be determined by its per capita income its average literacy level health status of its people all the above 2. Which of the following neighbouring countries has better performance in terms of human development than India? 3. Assume there are four families in a country. The average per capita income of these families is Rs 5000. If the income of three families is Rs  4000, Rs 7000 and Rs 3000 respectively, what is the income of the fourth family? 4. What is the main criterion used by the World Bank in classifying different countries? What are the limitations of this criterion, if any? 5. In what respects is the criterion used by the UNDP for measuring development different from the one used by the World Bank? 6. Why do we use averages? Are there any limitations to their use? Illustrate with your own examples related to development. 7. Kerala, with lower per capita income has a better human development ranking than Haryana. Hence, per capita income is not a useful criterion at all and  should not be used to compare states. Do you agree? Discuss. 8. Find out the present sources of energy that are used by the people in India. What could be the other possibilities fifty years from now? 9. Why is the issue of sustainability important for development? Consequences of environmental degradation do not respect national or state boundaries; this issue is no longer region or nation specific. Our future is linked together. Sustainability of development is comparatively a new area of knowledge in which scientists, economists, philosophers and other social scientists are working In general, the question of development or progress is perennial. At all times as a member of society and as individuals we need to ask where we want to go, what we wish to become and what our goals are. So the debate on development continues. 10.  The Earth has enough resources to meet the needs of all but not enough to satisfy the greed of even one person. How is this statement relevant to the disscusion of development? Discuss. 11. List a few examples of environmental degradation that you may have observed 12. For each of the items given in Table 1.6, find out which country is at the top and which is at the bottom. 13. The following table shows the proportion of adults (aged 15-49 years) whose BMI is below normal (BMI <18.5 kg/m2) in India. It is based on a survey of various states for the year 2019-21. Look at the table and answer the following questions. (i)  Compare the nutritional level of people in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh. (ii) Can you guess why around one-fifth of people in the country are undernourished even though it is argued that there is enough food in the country? Describe in your own words. ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY Invite three different speakers to talk to you about the development of your region. Ask them all the questions that come to your mind. Discuss these ideas in groups. Each group should prepare a wall chart, giving reasons about ideas that you  agree or do not agree with. Source: National Family Health Survey-5, NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER 2:   SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY An economy is best understood when we study its components or sectors. Sectoral classification can be done on the basis of several criteria. In this chapter, three types of classifications are discussed: primary/secondary/tertiary; organised/ unorganised; and public/private. Y create a discussion about these types by taking examples familiar to the students and relate them to their daily life. It is important to emphasise the changing roles of sectors. This can be highlighted further by drawing attention of the students to the rapid growth of service sector. While elaborating the ideas provided in the chapter, the students may need to be familiarised with a few fundamental concepts such as Gross Domestic Product, Employment etc. Since the students may find this difficult to understand, it is necessary to explain to them through examples. Several activities and exercises are suggested in the chapter to help the students understand how a person s activity could be placed   whether in the primary, secondary or tertiary, organised or unorganised, and public or private sector. You may encourage the students to talk to various working people around them (such as shop owners, casual workers, vegetable vendors, workshop mechanics, domestic workers etc.) to know more about how they live and work. Based on such information, the students can be encouraged to develop their own classification of Another important issue to be highlighted is about the problems caused by the changes in the roles of sectors. The chapter has taken the example of unemployment and what the government can do to solve it. The declining importance of agriculture and growing importance of industry and services should be related to the experience of the children by taking more examples that they may observe in their day-to-day life. Information derived from the media could be used for this ou may encourage the students to bring important cuttings and stories from newspapers, which could be prominently displayed in storyboards, and encourage the class to discuss these issues. While discussing the unorganised sector, the key issue of protecting the workers engaged in the sector should be ou may  also encourage the students to visit persons and enterprises in the unorganised sector and get a first hand experience from real life situation. Sources for Information The GVA data used in this chapter pertaining to Real Gross Value Added at Basic Prices by Industry of Origin at 2011 12 prices is taken from Economic Survey. It is a valuable source of GV other information relating to the Indian economy. For evaluation purposes, particularly to develop the analytical ability of learners, teachers can refer to this report through the Internet to get data for different years.  Due to change in, latest data is not used in the The employment figures are based on data taken from the five-yearly surveys on employment and unemployment conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) now known as National Statistical Office (NSO). NSO is an organisation under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India. The website you can log onto is: http:/mospi.gov.in. Employment data is also available from other sources such as Census of India. OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY SECTORS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Let us look at these pictures. You will find that people are engaged in various economic activities. Some of these are activities producing goods. Some others are producing services. These activities are happening around us every minute even as we speak.  How do we understand these activities? One way of doing this is to group them (classify them) using some important criterion. These groups are also There are many activities that are undertaken by directly using natural resources. Take, for example, the cultivation of cotton. It takes place within a crop season. For the growth of the cotton plant, we depend mainly, but not entirely, on natural factors like rainfall, sunshine and climate. The product of this activity, cotton, is a natural product. Similarly, in the case of an activity like dairy, we are dependent on the biological process of the animals and availability of fodder etc. The product here, milk, also is a natural product. Similarly, minerals and ores are also natural products. When we produce a good by exploiting natural resources, it is an activity of the primary sector. Why primary? This is because it forms the base for all other products that we subsequently make. Since products we get are from agriculture, dairy, fishing, forestry, this sector is also called agriculture and related The secondary sector covers activities in which natural products are changed into other forms through ways of manufacturing that we associate with industrial activity. It is the next step after primary. The product is not produced by nature but has to be made and therefore some process of manufacturing is essential. This could be in a factory, a workshop or at home.  For example, using cotton fibre from the plant, we spin yarn and weave cloth. Using sugarcane as a raw material, we make sugar or gur. We convert earth into bricks and use bricks to make houses and buildings. Since this sector gradually became associated with the different kinds of industries that came up, it is also called as industrial sector. After primary and secondary, there is a third category of activities that falls under tertiary sector and is different from the above two. These are activities that help in the development of the primary and secondary sectors. These activities, by themselves, do not produce a good but they are an aid or a support for the production process. For example, goods that are produced in the primary or secondary sector would need to be transported by trucks or trains and then sold in wholesale and retail shops. At times, it may be necessary to store these in godowns. We also may need to talk to others over telephone or send letters (communication) or borrow money from banks (banking) to help production and trade. Transport, storage, communication, banking, trade are some examples of tertiary activities. Since these activities generate services rather than goods, the tertiary sector is also called the Service sector also includes some essential services that may not directly help in the production of goods. For example, we require teachers, doctors, and those who provide personal services such as washermen, barbers, cobblers, lawyers, and people to do administrative and accounting works. In recent times, certain new services based on information technology such as internet cafe, ATM booths, call centres, software companies etc have helps to develop We begin by looking at different kind of economic activities. Imagine what would happen if farmers refuse to sell sugarcane to a particular sugar mill. The mill will have to shut Imagine what would happen to cotton cultivation if companies decide not to buy from the Indian market and import all cotton they need from other countries. Indian cotton cultivation will become less profitable and the farmers may even go bankrupt, if they cannot quickly switch to other crops. Cotton prices will fall. Farmers buy many goods such as pesticides and fertilisers. Imagine what would happen if the price of fertilisers or pumpsets go up. Cost of cultivation of the farmers will rise and their profits will be reduced. People working in industrial and service sectors need food. Imagine what would happen if there is a strike by transporters and lorries refuse to take vegetables, milk, etc. from rural areas. Food will become scarce in urban areas whereas farmers will be unable to sell 1. Complete the above table to show how sectors are dependent on each other. 2. Explain the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors using examples other than those mentioned in the text. 3. Classify the following list of occupations under primary, secondary and tertiary sectors: LET S WORK THESE OUT WHAT DOES THIS SHOW? This is an example of the secondary or industrial sector being dependent on Workers in match factory Call centre employee 4. Students in a school are often classified into primary and secondary or junior and senior. What is the criterion that is used? Do you think this is a useful classification? TABLE 2.1 EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Economic activities, though, are grouped into three different categories, are highly interdependent. Let us look at some examples. The various production activities in the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors produce a very large number of goods and services. Also, the three sectors have a large number of people working in them to produce these goods and services.  The next step, therefore, is to see how much goods and services are produced and how many people work in each sector. In an economy there could be one or more sectors which are dominant in terms of total production and employment, while other sectors are relatively small in size. How do we count the various goods and services and know the total production in each sector? With so many thousands of goods and services produced, you might think this is an impossible task! Not only would the task be enormous, you might also wonder how we can add up cars and computers and nails and furniture. It won t make sense!!! ou are right in thinking so. To get around this problem, economists suggest that the values of goods and services should be used rather than adding up the actual numbers. For example, if 10,000 kgs of wheat is sold at Rs 20 per kg, the value of wheat will be Rs 2,00,000. The value of 5000 coconuts at Rs 15 per coconut will be Rs 75,000. Similarly, the value of goods and services in the three sectors are calculated, and then added Remember, there is one precaution one has to take. Not every good (or service) that is produced and sold needs to be counted. It makes sense only to include the final goods and services. Take, for instance, a farmer who sells wheat to a flour mill for Rs 20 per kg. The mill grinds the wheat and sells the flour to a biscuit company for Rs 25 per kg. The biscuit company uses the flour and things such as sugar and oil to make four packets of biscuits. It sells biscuits in the market to the consumers for Rs 80 (Rs 20 per packet). Biscuits are the final goods, i.e., goods that reach the Why are only  final goods and services  counted? In contrast to final goods, goods such as wheat and the wheat flour in this example are intermediate goods.  Intermediate goods are used up in producing final goods and services. The value of final goods already includes the value of all the intermediate goods that are used in making the final good. Hence, the value of Rs 80 for the biscuits (final good) already includes the value of flour (Rs 25). Similarly, the value of all other intermediate goods would have been included. To count the value of the flour and wheat separately is therefore not correct because then we would be counting the value of the same things a number of times. First as wheat, then as flour and finally as biscuits. COMPARING THE THREE SECTORS...BUT I SHOULD BE PAID THE FULL VALUE OF THE WHEAT THAT I PRODUCE ! The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year. And the sum of production in the different sectors gives what is called the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) oduct (GDP) of a country.  It is the value of all final goods and services produced within a country within a country within a country within a country within a country during a particular year. GDP shows how big the In India, the mammoth task of measuring GDP is undertaken by a central government ministry. This Ministry, with the help of various government departments of all the Indian states and union territories, collects information relating to total volume of goods and services and their prices and then estimates Recently Indian Government began to bring out the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Value Added (GVA) in place of the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Domestic Product to be at par with global practices. The GVA measures the contribution of three sectors of an economy after adjusting for taxes and subsidies. You will learn more about the GVA and the difference between GDP and GVA in higher classes. Here we will only understand how goods and services produced in these three sectors primary, Historical Change in Sectors Generally, it has been noted from the histories of many, now developed, countries that at initial stages of development, primary sector was the most important sector of economic activity. As the methods of farming changed and agriculture sector began to prosper, it produced much more food than before. Many people could now take up other activities. There were increasing number of craft-persons and traders. Buying and selling activities increased many times. Besides, there were also transporters, administrators, army etc. However, at this stage, most of the goods produced were natural products from the primary sector and most people were also employed in Over a long time (more than hundred years), and especially because new methods of manufacturing were introduced, factories came up and started expanding. Those people who had earlier worked on farms now began to work in factories in large numbers. They were forced to do so as you read in history chapters. People began to use many more goods that were produced in factories at cheap rates. Secondary sector gradually became the most important in total production and employment. Hence, over time, a shift had taken place. This means that the importance of the sectors had changed. In the past 100 years, there has been a further shift from secondary to tertiary sector in developed countries.  The service sector has become the most important in terms of total production. Most of the working people are also employed in the service sector. This is the general pattern observed in developed countries. What is the total production and employment in the three sectors in India? Over the years have there been changes similar to the pattern observed for the developed countries? We shall see in the 1. What does the history of developed countries indicate about the shifts that have taken place between sectors? 2. Correct and arrange the important aspects for calculating GDP from this Jumble. To count goods and services we add the numbers that are produced. We count all those that were produced in the last five years. Since we shouldn t leave out anything we add up all these goods and services. 3. Discuss with your teacher how you could calculate the total value of a good or service by using the method of value added at each stage. LET S WORK THESE OUT production of goods and services in the three sectors. This is shown for two years, 1977 78 and 2017 18. We have used the data for these two years because the data ou can see how the total production has grown over the forty years., SECONDARY AND TERTIARY SECTORS IN INDIA Answer the following questions by looking at the graph: 1. Which was the largest producing sector in 1977 78? 2. Which is the largest producing sector in 2017 18? 3. Can you say which sector has grown the most over forty years? 4. What was the GDP of India in LET S WORK THESE Rising Importance of the ertiary Sector in Production Over the forty years between 1977 78 and 2017 18, while production in all the three sectors has increased, it has increased the most in the tertiary sector As a result, in the year 2017 18, the tertiary sector has emerged as the largest producing sector in India replacing the primary sector. Why is the tertiary sector becoming so important in India? There could be First, in any country several services such as hospitals, educational institutions, post and telegraph services, police stations, courts, village administrative offices, municipal corporations, defence, companies, etc. are required. These can be considered as basic services. In a developing country the government has to take responsibility for the provision of these services. Second, the development of agriculture and industry leads to the development of services such as Graph 1: GVA by Primary, Secondary and What does the comparison between 1977 78 and 2017 18 show? What conclusions can we draw from the comparison? s find out. Rs. in crores transport, trade, storage and the like, as we have already seen. Greater the development of the primary and secondary sectors, more would be the demand for such services. Third, as income levels rise, certain sections of people start demanding many more services like eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals, private schools, professional training ou can see this change quite sharply in cities, especially in big cities. Fourth, over the past decade or so, certain new services such as those based on information and communication technology have become important and essential. The production of these services has been rising rapidly.  In Chapter 4, we shall see examples of these new services and the reasons for their expansion. However, you must remember that not all of the service sector is growing equally well. Service sector in India employs many different kinds of people. At one end there are a limited number of services that employ highly skilled and educated workers. At the other end, there are a very large number of workers engaged in services such as small shopkeepers, repair persons, transport persons, etc. These people barely manage to earn a living and yet they perform these services because no alternative opportunities for work are available to them. Hence, only a part of this sector is growing in importance. You shall read more about this in the next Where are most of the people Graph 2 presents percentage share of the three sectors in GV A. Now you can directly see the changing importance of the sectors over the forty years. Graph 2: Share of Sectors in GVA A remarkable fact about India is that while there has been a change in the share of the three sectors in A, a similar shift has not taken place in employment. Graph 3 shows the share of employment in the three sectors in 1977- 2017-18. The primary sector continues to be the largest employer even now Why didn t a similar shift out of primary sector happen in case of employment? It is because not enough jobs were created in the secondary and tertiary sectors.  Even Graph 3: Share of Sectors in Employment (%) though industrial output or the production of goods went up by more than nine times during the period, employment in the industry went up by around three times. The same applies to the tertiary sector as well. While production in the service sector rose by 14 times, employment in the service sector rose around five times. As a result, more than half of the workers in the country are working in the primary sector, mainly in agriculture, producing only about one sixth of the GV A. In contrast to this, the secondary and tertiary sectors produce the rest of the produce whereas they employ less about half the people. Does this mean that the workers in agriculture are not producing as much as What it means is that there are more people in agriculture than is necessary. So, even if you move a few people out, production will not be affected. In other words, workers in the agricultural sector are For instance, take the case of a small farmer, Laxmi, owning about two hectares of unirrigated land dependent only on rain and growing crops, like jowar and arhar. All five members of her family work in the plot throughout the year. Why? They have nowhere else to go for work. Y ou will see that everyone is working, none remains idle, but in actual fact, their labour effort gets divided. Each one is doing some work but no one is fully employed. This is the situation of underemployment, where people are apparently working but all of them are made to work less than their potential. This kind of underemployment is hidden in contrast to someone who does not have a job and is clearly visible as unemployed. Hence, it is also called disguised unemployment. Now, supposing a landlord, Sukhram, comes and hires one or two members of the family to work on his land. Laxmi s family is now able to earn some extra income through wages. Since you do not need five people to look after that small plot, two people moving out does not affect production on their farm. In the above example, two people may move to work in a factory. Once again the earnings of the family would increase and they would also continue to produce as much from their land. There are lakhs of farmers like Laxmi  in India. This means that even if we remove a lot of people from agricultural sector and provide them with proper work elsewhere, agricultural production will not suffer. The incomes of the people who take up other work would increase the total family income. This underemployment can also happen in other sectors. For example there are thousands of casual workers in the service sector in urban areas who search for daily employment. They are employed as painters, plumbers, repair persons and others doing odd jobs. Many of them don t find work everyday. Similarly, we see other people of the service sector on the street pushing a cart or selling something where they may spend the whole day but earn very little. They are doing this work because they do not have How to Create More From the above discussion, we can see that there continues to be considerable underemployment in agriculture. There are also people who are not employed at all. In what ways can one increase employment for people? Let us look at some of them. Take the case of Laxmi with her two-hectare plot of unirrigated land. The government can spend some money or banks can provide a loan, to construct a well for her family to irrigate the land. Laxmi will then be able to irrigate her land and take a second crop, wheat, during the rabi season. Let us suppose that one hectare of wheat can provide employment to two people for 50 days (including sowing, watering, fertiliser LET S WORK THESE OUT TABLE 2.2 SHARE OF PRIMARY SECTOR IN GDP AND EMPLOYMENT Share in Gross Value Added (GVA) Share in employment 1. Complete the table using the data given in Graphs 2 and 3 and answer the question that follows. Ignore if data are not available for some years. What are the changes that you observe in the primary sector over a span of forty 2. Choose the correct answer: Underemployment occurs when people do not want to work are working in a lazy manner are working less than what they are capable of doing are not paid for their work 3. Compare and contrast the changes in India with the pattern that was observed for developed countries. What kind of changes between sectors were desired but did not happen in India? 4. Why should we be worried about underemployment? application and harvesting).  So, two more members of the family can be employed in her own field. Now suppose a new dam is constructed and canals are dug to irrigate many such farms. This could lead to a lot of employment generation within the agricultural sector itself reducing the problem of underemployment. Now, suppose Laxmi and other farmers produce much more than before. They would also need to sell some of this. For this they may be required to transport their products to a nearby town. If the government invests some money in transportation and storage of crops, or makes better rural roads so that mini-trucks reach everywhere several farmers like Laxmi, who now have access to water, can continue to grow and sell these crops. This activity can provide productive employment to not just farmers but also others such as those in services like transport or trade. Laxmi s need is not confined to water alone. To cultivate the land, she also needs seeds, fertilisers, agricultural equipment and pumpsets to draw water. Being a poor farmer, she cannot afford many of these. So, she will have to borrow money from moneylenders and pay a high rate of interest. If the local bank gives her credit at a reasonable rate of interest, she will be able to buy all these in time and cultivate her land. This means that along with water, we also need to provide cheap agricultural credit to the farmers for farming to improve. We will look at some of these needs in Chapter 3, Money and Credit. Another way by which we can tackle this problem is to identify, promote and locate industries and services in semi-rural areas where a large number of people may be employed. For instance, suppose many farmers decide to grow arhar and chickpea (pulse crops). Setting up a dal mill to procure and process these and sell in the cities is one such example. Opening a cold storage could give an opportunity for farmers to store their products like potatoes and onions and sell them when the price is good. In villages near forest areas, we can start honey collection centres where farmers can come and sell wild honey. It is also possible to set up industries that process vegetables and agricultural produce like potato, sweet potato, rice, wheat, tomato, fruits, which can be sold in outside employment in industries located in semi-rural areas and not necessarily in large urban centres. Do you know that in India about 60 per cent of the population belongs to the age group 5-29 years? Out of this, only about 51 per cent are attending educational institutions. The rest and particularly those aged less than 18 years may be at home or What groups of people do you think are unemployed or underemployed in your area? Can you think of some measures that could be taken up for them? Gur Making in in about 625 districts of India.  It is called Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005 (MGNREGA 2005). Under MGNREGA 2005, all those who are able to, and are in need of, work in rural areas are guaranteed 100 days of employment in a year by the government. If the government fails in its duty to provide employment, it will give unemployment allowances to the people. The types of work that would in future help to increase the production from land  will be given preference under the Act. many of them may be working as child labourers.  If these children are to attend schools, we will require more buildings, more teachers and other staff. A study conducted by the erstwhile Planning Commission  (now known as NITI Aayog) estimates that nearly 20 lakh jobs can be created in the education sector alone. Similarly, if we are to improve the health situation, we need many more doctors, nurses, health workers etc. to work in rural areas. These are some ways by which jobs would be created and we would also be able to address the important aspects of development talked about in Chapter 1. Every state or region has potential for increasing the income and employment for people in that area. It could be tourism, or regional craft industry, or new services like IT. Some of these would require proper planning and support from the government. For example, the same study by the Planning Commission says that if tourism as a sector is improved, every year we can give additional employment to more than 35 lakh people. We must realise that some of the suggestions discussed above would take a long time to implement. For the short-term, we need some quick measures. Recognising this, the central government in India made a law implementing the Right to Work 1. Why do you think MGNREGA 2005 is referred to as   Right to work  ? 2. Imagine that you are the village head. In that capacity suggest some activities that you think should be taken up under this Act that would also increase the income of 3. How would income and employment increase if farmers were provided with irrigation and marketing facilities? 4. In what ways can employment be increased in urban areas? LET S WORK THESE OUT Let us examine another way of classifying activities in the economy. This looks at the way people are employed. What are their conditions of work? Are there any rules and regulations that are followed as regards their employment? organised because it has some formal processes and procedures. Some of these people may not be employed by anyone but may work on their own but they too have to register themselves with the government and follow the rules and regulations. Workers in the organised sector enjoy security of employment. They are expected to work only a fixed number of hours. If they work more, they have to be paid overtime by the employer. They also get several other benefits from the employers. What are Kanta works in the organised sector. Organised sector covers those enterprises or places of work where the terms of employment are regular and therefore, people have assured work. They are registered by the government and have to follow its rules and regulations which are given in various laws such as the Factories Act, Minimum Wages Act, Payment of Gratuity Act, Shops and Establishments Act etc. It is called DIVISION OF SECTORS AS ORGANISED AND Kanta works in an office. She attends her office from 9.30 a.m. to 5.30 p.m. She gets her salary regularly at the end of every month. In addition to the salary, she also gets provident fund as per the rules laid down by the government. She also gets medical and other allowances. Kanta does not go to office on Sundays. This is a paid holiday. When she joined work, she was given an appointment letter stating all the terms and conditions of work. Kamal is Kanta s neighbour. He is a daily wage labourer in a nearby grocery shop. He goes to the shop at 7:30 in the morning and works till 8:00 p.m. in the evening. He gets no other allowances apart from his wages. He is not paid for the days he does not work. He has therefore no leave or paid holidays. Nor was he given any formal letter saying that  he has been employed in the shop. He can be asked to leave anytime by his employer. Do you see the differences in the conditions of work between Kanta and Kamal? these benefits? They get paid leave, payment during holidays, provident fund, gratuity etc. They are supposed to get medical benefits and, under the laws, the factory manager has to ensure facilities like drinking water and a safe working environment. When they retire, these workers get pensions as well. In contrast, Kamal works in the unorganised sector. The unorganised sector is characterised by small and scattered units which are largely outside the control of the government. There are rules and regulations but these are not followed. Jobs here are low-paid and often not regular. There is no provision for overtime, paid leave, holidays, leave due to sickness etc. Employment is not secure. People can be asked to leave without any reason. When there is less work, such as during some seasons, some people may be asked to leave. A lot also depends on the whims of the. This sector includes a large number of people who are employed on their own doing small jobs such as selling on the street or doing repair, farmers work on their own and hire labourers as and when they require. 1. Look at the following examples. Which of these are unorganised sector activities? A teacher taking classes in a  school A headload worker carrying a bag of cement on his back in a market A farmer irrigating her field A doctor in a  hospital treating a patient A daily wage labourer working under a contractor A factory worker going to work in a big factory A handloom weaver working in her house 2. Talk to someone who has a regular job in the organised sector and another who works in the unorganised sector. Compare and contrast their working conditions in all aspects. 3. How would you distinguish between organised and unorganised sectors? Explain in your own words. 4. The table below shows the estimated number of workers in India in the organised and unorganised sectors in the late 1990s. Read the table carefully. Fill in the missing data and answer the questions that follow. LET S WORK THESE OUT What is the percentage of people in the unorganised sector in agriculture? Do you agree that agriculture is an unorganised sector activity? Why? If we look at the country as a whole, we find that  % of the workers in India are in the unorganised sector. Organised sector employment is available to only about  % of the workers in India. Total in Percentage TABLE 2.3 WORKERS IN DIFFERENT SECTORS (IN MILLIONS) How to Protect Workers in the Unorganised Sector? The organised sector offers jobs that are the most sought-after. But the employment opportunities in the organised sector have been expanding very slowly. It is also common to find many organised sector enterprises in the unorganised sector. They adopt such strategies to evade taxes and refuse to follow laws that protect labourers. As a result, a large number of workers are forced to enter the unorganised sector jobs, which pay a very low salary. They are often exploited and not paid a fair wage. Their earnings are low and not regular. These jobs are not secure and have no other benefits. Since the 1990s, it is also common to see a large number of workers losing their jobs in the organised sector. These workers are forced to take up jobs in the unorganised sector with low earnings. Hence, besides the need for more work, there is also a need for protection and support of the workers in the Who are these vulnerable people who need protection? In the rural areas, the unorganised sector mostly comprises of landless agricultural labourers, small and marginal farmers, sharecroppers and artisans (such as weavers, blacksmiths, carpenters and goldsmiths). Nearly 80 per cent of rural households in India are in small and marginal farmer category. These farmers need to be supported through adequate facility for timely delivery of seeds, agricultural inputs, credit, storage facilities and marketing outlets. In the urban areas, unorganised sector comprises mainly of workers in small-scale industry, casual workers in construction, trade and transport etc., and those who work as street vendors, head load workers, garment makers, rag pickers etc. Small-scale industry also needs government s support for procuring raw material and marketing of output. The casual workers in both rural and urban areas need to be protected. We also find that majority of workers from scheduled castes, tribes and backward communities find themselves in the unorganised sector. Besides getting the irregular and low paid work, these workers also face social discrimination. Protection and support to the unorganised sector workers is thus necessary for both economic and When factories close down, many once regular workers are found selling goods or pushing a cart or doing some other odd job Problems indicated and how they can be tackled With so many activities taking place around us, one needs to use the process of classification to think in a useful manner. The criterion for classification could be many depending on what we desire to find out. The process of classification helps to analyse a situation. In dividing the economic activities into three sectors   primary, secondary, tertiary   the criterion used was the  nature of activity. On the basis of this classification, we were able to analyse the pattern of total production and employment in India. Similarly, we divided the economic activities into organised and unorganised and used the classification to look at employment in the two sectors. What was the most important conclusion that was derived from the classification exercises? What were the problems and solutions that were indicated? Can you summarise the information in the following table? TABLE 2.4 CLASSIFYING ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Another way of classifying economic activities into sectors could be on the basis of who owns assets and is responsible for the delivery of services. In the public sector, the government owns most of the assets and provides all the services. In the private sector, ownership of assets and delivery of services is in the hands of private individuals or companies. Railways or post office is an example of the public sector whereas companies like Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited (TISCO) or Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) are privately owned. Activities in the private sector are guided by the motive to earn profits. To get such services we have to pay money to these individuals and companies. The purpose of the public sector is not just to earn profits. Governments raise money through taxes and other ways to meet expenses on the services rendered by it. Modern day governments spend on a whole range of activities. What are these activities? Why do governments spend on such activities? Let s find out. There are several things needed by the society as a whole but which the private sector  will not provide at a reasonable cost. Why? Some of these need spending large sums of money, which is beyond the capacity SECTORS IN TERMS OF OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS of the private sector. Also, collecting money from thousands of people who use these facilities is not easy if they do provide these things they would charge a high rate for their use. Examples are construction of roads, bridges, railways, harbours, generating electricity, providing irrigation through dams etc.  Thus, governments have to undertake such heavy  spending and ensure that these facilities are available for There are some activities, which the government has to support. The private sector may not continue their production or business unless government encourages it. For example, selling electricity at the cost of generation may push up the costs of production of goods in many industries. Many units, especially small-scale units, might have to shut down. Government here steps in by producing and supplying electricity at rates which these industries can afford. Government has to bear part of the cost., the Government in India buys wheat and rice from farmers at a  fair price. This it stores in its godowns and sells at a lower price to consumers through ration shops. Y have read about this in the chapter on Food Security in Class IX. The government has to bear some of the cost. In this way, the government There are a large number of activities which are the primary responsibility of the government. The government must spend on these. Providing health and education facilities for all is one example. W discussed some of these issues in the. Running proper schools and providing quality education, particularly elementary education, is the duty of the government. India  of illiterate population is one of the largest in the world., we know that nearly half s children are malnourished and a quarter of them are critically ill. We have read about Infant Mortality Rates. The infant mortality rate of Odisha (36) or Madhya Pradesh (43) is higher than some of the poorest regions of the world. Government also needs to pay attention to aspects of human development such as availability of safe drinking water, housing facilities for the poor and food and nutrition. It is also the duty of the government to take care of the poorest and most ignored regions of the country through increased spending in such areas. In this chapter we have looked at ways of classifying economic activities into some meaningful groups. One way of doing this is to examine whether the activity relates to, secondary or tertiary sectors. The data for India, for the last thirty years, shows that while  goods and services produced in the tertiary sector contribute the most to GDP, the employment remains in the primary sector. We have also seen what all can be done for increasing employment opportunities in the country Another classification is to consider whether people are working in organised or unorganised sectors. Most people are working in the unorganised sectors and protection is necessary for them. We also looked at the difference between private and public activities, and why it is important for public activities to focus on certain areas. Fill in the blanks using the correct option given in the bracket: (i) Employment in the service sector _________ increased to the same extent as production. (has / has not) (ii) Workers in the _________ sector do not produce goods. (tertiary / agricultural) (iii) Most of the workers in the _________ sector enjoy job security. (organised / unorganised) (iv) A _________ proportion of labourers in India are working in the unorganised sector. (large / small) (v) Cotton is a _________ product and cloth is a _________ product. (vi) The activities in primary, secondary and tertiary sectors are_________ [independent / interdependent] Choose the most appropriate answer. (a) The sectors are classified into public and private sector on the basis of: the nature of economic activity ownership of enterprises number of workers employed in the enterprise (b) Production of a commodity, mostly through the natural process, is an activity in _________ sector. (c) GDP is the total value of _________ produced during a particular year. all goods and services all final goods and services all intermediate goods and services all intermediate and final goods and services (d) In terms of GVA the share of tertiary sector in 2017 18 is between _________ per cent. 20 to 30 30 to 40 50 to 60 60 to 70 Match the following: Problems faced by farming sector Some possible measures 1. Unirrigated land (a) Setting up agro-based mills 2. Low prices for crops (b) Cooperative marketing societies 3. Debt burden (c) Procurement of food grains by government 4. No job in the off season (d) Construction of canals by the government 5. Compelled to sell their grains to (e) Banks to provide credit with low interest the local traders soon after harvest Find the odd one out and say why. Tourist guide, dhobi, tailor, potter Teacher, doctor, vegetable vendor, lawyer Postman, cobbler, soldier, police constable MTNL, Indian Railways, Air India, Jet Airways, All India Radio A research scholar looked at the working people in the city of Surat and found Percentage of working people Nature of employment Place of work In offices and factories registered with the government Own shops, office, clinics in marketplaces with formal license People working on the street, construction workers, domestic Working in small workshops usually not registered with the Complete the table. What is the percentage of workers in the unorganised sector in this city? Do you think the classification of economic activities into primary, secondary and tertiary is useful? Explain how. For each of the sectors that we came across in this chapter why should one focus on employment and GVA? Could there be other issues which should be Make a long list of all kinds of work that you find adults around you doing for a living. In what way can you classify them? Explain your choice. How is the tertiary sector different from other sectors? Illustrate with a few What do you understand by disguised unemployment? Explain with an example each from the urban and rural areas. Distinguish between open unemployment and disguised unemployment.  Tertiary sector is not playing any significant role in the development of Indian economy.  Do you agree? Give reasons in support of your answer. Service sector in India employs two different kinds of people. Who are these? Workers are exploited in the unorganised sector. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your answer. How are the activities in the economy classified on the basis of employment Compare the employment conditions prevailing in the organised and unorganised Explain the objective of implementing the MG NREGA 2005. Using examples from your area compare and contrast that activities and functions of private and public sectors. Discuss and fill the following table giving one example each from your area. Well managed organisation Badly managed organisation Give a few examples of public sector activities and explain why the government has taken them up. Explain how public sector contributes to the economic development of a nation. The workers  in the unorganised sector need protection on the following issues: wages, safety and health. Explain with examples. A study in Ahmedabad found that out of 15,00,000 workers in the city, 11,00,000 worked in the unorganised sector. The total income of the city in this year (1997-1998) was Rs 60,000 million. Out of this Rs 32,000 million was generated in the organised sector. Present this data as a table. What kind of ways should be thought of for generating more employment in the city? The following table gives the GVA in Rupees (Crores) by the three sectors: Calculate the share of the three sectors in GDP for 2000 and 2013. Show the data as a bar diagram similar to Graph 2 in the chapter. What conclusions can we draw from the bar graph? NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER 3: MONEY AND CREDIT Money is a fascinating subject and full of curiosities. It is important to capture this element for the students. The history of money and how various forms were used at different times is an interesting story. At this stage the purpose is to allow students to realise the social situation in which these forms were used. Modern forms of money are linked to the banking system. This is the central idea of the first part of the chapter. The present situation in India, where newer forms of money are slowly spreading with computerisation of the banking system, offers many opportunities to students to explore on their own. We need not get into a formal discussion of the  functions of money  but let it come up as questions. There are certain areas that are not covered, such as  creation of money  (money multiplier) or the backing of the modern system that may be discussed if you desire. As you would see in the chapter, the stock of money consists of currency held by the public and the demand deposits that they hold with the banks. This is the money that people can use as they wish and the government has to ensure that the system works smoothy. What would happen when the government declares that some of the currency notes used by people would be made invalid and would be replaced by new currency? In India, during November 2016, currency notes in the denomination of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1,000 were declared invalid. People were asked to surrender these notes to the bank by a specific period and receive new Rs. 500, Rs. 2,000 or other currency notes. This is known as  demonetisation. Since then, people were also encouraged to use their bank deposits rather than cash for transactions. Hence, digital transactions started by using bank-to-bank transfer through the internet or mobile phones, cheques, ATM cards, credit cards, and Point of Sale (POS) swipe machines at shops. This is promoted to reduce the requirement of cash for transactions and also control corruption. Students could be asked to debate on the process and the impact of demonetisation. They can be guided to make a collage of the major areas where people use digital and cash transactions which are legitimate and legal. They can also discuss the transactions which are legal and why. It is also important to intimate students that different types of plastic cards are used in place of cash transactions but not all of them money per se. Credit is a crucial element in economic life and it is, therefore, important to first understand this in a conceptual manner. What are the aspects that one looks at in any credit arrangement and how this affects people is the main focus of the second part of the chapter. The world around us offers a tremendous variety of such arrangements and it would be ideal to explain these aspects of credit from situations that are familiar to your students. The other crucial issue of credit is its availability to all, especially the poor, and on reasonable terms. We need to emphasise that this is a right of the people and without which a large section of them would be kept out of the development process. There are many innovative interventions, such as that of Grameen Bank, of which students may be made familiar with but it is important to realise that we don t have answers to all questions. We need to find new ways and this is one of the social challenges that developing countries face. Sources for Information The data on formal and informal sector credit used in this chapter is drawn from the survey on rural debt by the National Sample Survey Organisation (All India Debt and Investment Survey, 77th Round 2019, conducted by NSSO) now known as National Statistical Office (NSO). The information and data on Grameen Bank is taken from newspaper reports and websites. In order to get the details of bank-related statistics or a particular detail of a bank, you can log on to the websites of the Reserve Bank of India (www.rbi.org) and the concerned banks. Data on self-help groups is provided on the website of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development The use of money spans a very large part of our everyday life. Look around you and you would easily be able to identify several transactions involving money in any single day. Can you make a list of these? In many of these transactions, goods are being bought and sold with the use of money. In some of these transactions, services are being exchanged with money.  For some, there might not be any actual transfer of money taking place now but a promise to pay money later. Have you ever wondered why transactions are made in money? The reason is simple. A person holding money can easily exchange it for any commodity or service that he or she might want. Thus everyone  prefers to receive payments in money and then exchange the money for things that they want.  Take the case of a shoe manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes in the market and buy wheat.  The shoe manufacturer will first exchange shoes that he has produced for money, and then exchange the money for wheat. Imagine how much more difficult it would be if the shoe manufacturer had to directly exchange shoes for wheat without the use of money. He would have to look for a wheat growing farmer who not only wants to sell wheat but also wants to buy the That is, both parties have to agree to sell and buy each This is known as of wants. What a person desires to sell is exactly what the other wishes to buy. In a barter system where goods are directly exchanged without the use of money, double coincidence of wants is an In contrast, in an economy where money is in use, money by providing the crucial intermediate step eliminates the need for double coincidence of wants. It is no longer necessary for the shoe manufacturer to look for a farmer who will buy his shoes and at the same time sell him MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE I DON T NEED SHOES. I NEED I WANT SHOES. BUT I DON T HAVE We have seen that money is something that can act as a medium of exchange in transactions.  Before the introduction of coins, a variety of objects was used as money. For example, since the very early ages, Indians used  grains and cattle as money. Thereafter came the use of metallic coins   gold, silver, copper coins   a phase which continued well into the last century. Modern forms of money include currency   paper notes and coins. Unlike the things that were used as money earlier, modern currency is not made of precious metal such as gold, silver and copper.  And unlike grain and cattle, they are neither of everyday use. The modern currency is without any use of its own. Then, why is it accepted as a medium of exchange?  It is accepted as a medium of exchange because the currency is authorised by the government of the country. In India, the Reserve Bank of India issues currency notes on behalf of the central government. As per Indian law, no other individual or organisation is allowed to issue currency. Moreover, the law legalises the use of rupee as a medium of payment that cannot be refused in settling transactions in India. No individual in India can legally refuse a payment made in rupees. Hence, the rupee is widely accepted as a medium of exchange. Deposits with Banks The other form in which people hold money is as deposits with banks. At a point of time, people need only some currency  for their day-to-day needs. For instance, workers who receive their salaries at the end of each month have extra cash at the beginning of the month. What do people do with this extra cash? They deposit it with the banks by opening a bank account in their name. Banks accept the deposits and also pay an amount as interest on the deposits. In this way people s money is safe with the banks and it earns an amount as interest.  People also have the provision to withdraw the money as and when they require. Since the deposits in the bank accounts can be withdrawn on demand, these deposits are called demand deposits. 1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things? 2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages being paid through barter? LET S WORK THESE OUT MODERN FORMS OF  MONEY (may be 2500 wheat. All he has to do is find a buyer for his shoes. Once he has exchanged his shoes for money, he can purchase wheat or any other commodity in the market. Since money acts as an intermediate in the exchange process, it is called a medium of exchange. A shoe manufacturer, M. Salim has to make a payment to the leather supplier and writes a cheque for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs his bank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque, and  deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without any payment of cash. Thus we see that demand deposits share the essential features of money. The facility of cheques against demand deposits makes it possible to directly settle payments without the use of cash. Since demand deposits are accepted widely as a means of payment, along with currency, they constitute money in the modern economy. You must remember the role that the banks play here. But for the banks, there would be no demand deposits and no payments by cheques against these deposits.  The modern forms of money   currency and deposits   are closely linked to the working of the modern banking Coding used by banks Demand deposits offer another interesting facility. It is this facility which lends it the essential characteristics of money (that of a medium of exchange). You would have heard of payments being made by cheques instead of cash. For payment through cheque, the payer who has an account with the bank, makes out a cheque for a specific amount. A cheque is a paper instructing the bank to pay a specific amount from the person s account to the person in whose name the cheque has been LET US TRY AND UNDERSTAND HOW CHEQUE PAYMENTS ARE MADE AND REALISED WITH Let us take the story of banks further. What do the banks do with the deposits which they accept from the public? There is an interesting mechanism at work here. Banks keep only a small proportion of their deposits as cash with themselves.  For example, banks in India these days hold about 5 per cent of their deposits as cash. This is kept as provision to pay the depositors who might come to withdraw money from the bank on any given day. Since, on any particular day, only some of its many depositors come to withdraw cash, the bank is able to manage with Banks use the major portion of the deposits to extend loans.  There is a huge demand for loans for various economic activities. W e shall read more about this in the following sections. Banks make use of the deposits to meet the loan requirements of the people.  In this way, banks mediate between those who have surplus funds (the depositors) and those who are in need of these funds (the borrowers). Banks charge a higher interest rate on loans than what they offer on deposits. The difference between what is charged from borrowers and what is paid to depositors is their main source of LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKS 1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would he write a cheque to withdraw money? 2. Tick the correct answer. After the transaction between Salim and Prem, (i) Salim s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem s balance increases. (ii) Salim s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem s balance increases. (iii) Salim s balance in his bank account increases and Prem s balance decreases. 3. Why are demand deposits considered as money? LET S WORK THESE OUT What do you think would happen if all the depositors went to ask for their money at the same time? A large number of transactions in our day-to-day activities involve credit in some form or the other. Credit (loan) refers to an agreement in which the lender supplies the borrower with money, goods or services in return for the promise of future payment. Let us see how credit works through the following (1) Festival Season (1) Festival Season (1) Festival Season (1) Festival Season (1) Festival Season It is festival season two months from now and the shoe manufacturer, Salim, has received an order from a large trader in town for 3,000 pairs of shoes to be delivered in a month time. To complete production on time, Salim has to hire a few more workers for stitching and pasting work. He has to purchase the raw materials. To meet these expenses, Salim obtains loans from two sources. First, he asks the leather supplier to supply leather now and promises to pay him later. Second, he obtains loan in cash from the large trader as advance payment for 1000 pairs of shoes with a promise to deliver the whole order by the end of the At the end of the month, Salim is able to deliver the order, make a good profit, and repay the money that he had borrowed. (2) Swapna s Problem (2) Swapna s Problem (2) Swapna s Problem (2) Swapna s Problem (2) Swapna s Problem TWO DIFFERENT CREDIT SITUATIONS In this case, Salim obtains credit to meet the working capital needs of production. The credit helps him to meet the ongoing expenses of production, complete production on time, and thereby increase his earnings. Credit therefore plays a vital and positive role in this situation. Swapna, a small farmer, grows groundnut on her three acres of land. She takes a loan from the moneylender to meet the expenses of cultivation, hoping that her harvest would help repay the loan. Midway through the season the crop is hit by pests and the crop fails. Though Swapna sprays  her crops with expensive pesticides, it makes little difference. She is unable to repay the moneylender and the debt grows over the year into a large amount. Next year, Swapna takes a fresh loan for cultivation. It is a normal crop this year. But the earnings are not enough to cover the old loan. She is caught in debt. She has to sell a part of the land to pay off the debt. TERMS OF CREDIT Every loan agreement specifies an interest rate which the borrower must pay to the lender along with the In rural areas, the main demand for credit is for crop production. Crop production involves considerable costs on seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, water, electricity, repair of equipment, etc. There is a minimum stretch of three to four months between the time when the farmers buy these inputs and when they sell the crop. Farmers usually take crop loans at the beginning of the season and repay the loan after harvest. Repayment of the loan is crucially dependent on the income from farming. 1. Fill the following table. 2. Supposing Salim continues to get orders from traders. What would be his position after 6 years? 3. What are the reasons that make Swapna s situation so risky? Discuss factors   pesticides; role of moneylenders; climate. LET S WORK THESE OUT Why did they need credit? What was the risk? What was the outcome? In Swapna s case, the failure of the impossible. She had to sell part of the land to repay the loan. Credit, instead of helping Swapna improve her earnings, left her worse off. This is an example of what is commonly called debt-trap. Credit in this case pushes the borrower into a situation from which recovery is very painful. In one situation credit helps to increase earnings and therefore the person is better off than before. In another situation, because of the crop failure, credit pushes the person into a debt trap. To repay her loan she has to sell a portion of her land. She is clearly much worse off than before. Whether credit would be useful or not, on the risks in the situation and whether there is some support, in case of loss. repayment of the principal. In addition, lenders may demand collateral (security) against loans. Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks) and  uses this as a guarantee to a lender until the loan is repaid. If the borrower fails to repay the loan, the lender has the right to sell the asset or collateral to obtain payment. Property such as land titles, deposits with banks, livestock are some common examples of collateral used for borrowing. A House Loan A House Loan A House Loan A House Loan A House Loan Megha has taken a loan of Rs 5 lakhs from the bank  to purchase a house. The annual interest rate on the loan is 12 per cent and the loan is to be repaid in 10 years in monthly instalments. Megha had to submit to the bank, documents showing her employment records and salary before the bank agreed to give her the loan. The bank retained as collateral the papers of the new house, which will be returned to Megha only when she repays the entire loan with interest. Fill the following details of Megha s housing loan. Interest rate, collateral and documentation requirement, and the mode of repayment together comprise what is called the terms of credit. The terms of credit vary substantially from one credit arrangement to another. They may vary depending on the nature of the lender and the borrower. The next section will provide examples of the varying terms of credit in different credit arrangements. 1. Why do lenders ask for collateral while lending? 2. Given that a large number of people in our country are poor, does it in any way affect their capacity to borrow? 3. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct option from the brackets. While taking a loan, borrowers look for easy terms of credit. This means __________ (low/high) interest rate, ______________(easy/ tough) conditions for repayment, ___________(less/more) collateral and documentation requirements. LET S WORK THESE OUT Loan amount (in Rupees) Duration of loan Mode of repayment Shyamal tells us that every season he needs loans for cultivation on his 1.5 acres of land. Till a few years back, he would borrow money from the village moneylender at an interest rate of five per cent per month (60% per annum). For the last few years, Shyamal has been borrowing from an agricultural trader in the village at an interest rate of three per cent per month. At the beginning of the cropping season, the trader supplies the farm inputs on credit, which is  to be repaid when the crops are ready for harvest. Besides the interest charge on the loan, the trader also makes the farmers promise to sell the crop to him. This way the trader can ensure that the money is repaid promptly. Also, since the crop prices are low after the harvest, the trader is able to make a profit from buying the crop at a low price from the farmers and then selling it later when the price has risen. Variety of Credit Arrangements Variety of Credit Arrangements Variety of Credit Arrangements Variety of Credit Arrangements Variety of Credit Arrangements Example of a Village Rohit and Ranjan had finished reading about the terms of credit in class. They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed in their area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to some people in their village.  Read what they record... 15th Nov, 2019. We head directly for the fields where most farmers and labourers would be working at this time of the day. The fields are planted with potato crops. We first meet Shyamal, a small farmer in Sonpur, a small irrigated village. We next meet Arun who is supervising the work of one farm labourer. Arun has seven acres of land. He is one of the few persons in Sonpur to receive bank loan for cultivation. The interest rate on the  loan is 8.5 per cent per annum, and can be repaid anytime in the next three years.  Arun plans to repay the loan after harvest by selling a part of the crop. He then intends to store the rest of the potatoes in a cold storage and  apply for a fresh loan from the bank against the cold storage receipt. The bank offers this facility to farmers who have taken crop loan from them. Rama is working in a neighbouring field. She works as an agricultural labourer. There are several months in the year when Rama has no work, and needs credit to meet the daily expenses. Expenses on sudden illnesses or functions in the family are also met through loans. Rama has to depend on her employer, a medium landowner in Sonpur, for credit. The landowner charges an interest rate of 5 per cent per month. Rama repays the money by working for the landowner. Most of the time, Rama has to take a fresh loan, before the previous loan has been repaid. At present, she owes the landowner Rs 5,000. Though the landowner doesn t treat her well, she continues to work for him since she can get loans from him when in need. Rama tells us that the only source of credit for the landless people in Sonpur are Loans from Cooperatives Loans from Cooperatives Loans from Cooperatives Loans from Cooperatives Loans from Cooperatives Besides banks, the other major source of cheap credit in rural areas are the cooperative societies (or cooperatives).  Members of a cooperative pool their resources for cooperation in certain areas. There are several types of cooperatives possible such as farmers cooperatives, weavers cooperatives, industrial workers cooperatives, etc. Krishak Cooperative functions in a village not very far away from Sonpur. It has 2300 farmers as members. It accepts deposits from its members. With these deposits as collateral, the Cooperative has obtained a large loan from the bank. These funds are used to provide loans to members. Once these loans are repaid, another round of lending can take place. Krishak Cooperative provides loans for the purchase of agricultural implements, loans for cultivation and agricultural trade, fishery loans, loans for construction of houses and for a variety of other 1. List the various sources of credit in Sonpur. 2. Underline the various uses of credit in Sonpur in the above passages. 3. Compare the terms of credit for the small farmer, the medium farmer and the landless agricultural worker in Sonpur. 4. Why will Arun have a higher income from cultivation compared to Shyamal? 5. Can everyone in Sonpur get credit at a cheap rate? Who are the people who can? 6. Tick the correct answer. (i) Over the years, Rama s debt   will rise.   will remain constant.   will decline. (ii) Arun is one of the few people in Sonpur to take a bank loan because   other people in the village prefer to borrow from the moneylenders.   banks demand collateral which everyone cannot provide.   interest rate on bank loans is same as the interest rate charged by 7. Talk to some people to find out the credit arrangements that exist in your area. Record your conversation. Note the differences in the terms of credit across people. LET S WORK THESE OUT the RBI sees that the banks give loans not just to profit-making businesses and traders but also to small cultivators, small scale industries, to small borrowers etc. Periodically, banks have to submit information to the RBI on how much they are lending, to whom, at what interest There is no organisation which supervises the credit activities of lenders in the informal sector. They can lend at whatever interest rate they We have seen in the above examples that people obtain loans from various sources. The various types of loans can be conveniently grouped as formal informal sector loans. are loans from banks and cooperatives. The informal lenders include employers, relatives and friends, etc.  In Graph 1 you can see the various sources of credit to rural households in India. Is more credit coming from the formal sector or the The Reserve Bank of India supervises the functioning of formal sources of loans.  For instance, we have seen that the banks maintain a minimum cash balance out of the deposits they receive. The RBI monitors the banks in actually maintaining cash balance. Similarly, FORMAL SECTOR CREDIT IN INDIA BUT WHY SHOULD A BANK WANT US HAVE A HIGHER INCOME? Graph 1: Sources of Credit in Rural India, 2019 and Society, 10% choose. There is no one to stop them from using unfair means to get their Compared to the formal lenders, most of the informal lenders charge a much higher interest on loans. Thus, the cost to the borrower of informal loans is much higher. Higher cost of borrowing means a larger part of the earnings of the borrowers is used to repay the loan. Hence, borrowers have less income left for themselves (as we saw for Shyamal in Sonpur). In certain cases, the high interest rate for borrowing can mean that the amount to be repaid is greater than the income of the borrower. This could lead to increasing debt (as we saw for Rama in Sonpur) and debt trap. Also, people who might wish to start an enterprise by borrowing may not do so because of the high cost of For these reasons, banks and cooperative societies need to lend more. This would lead to higher in- comes and many people could then borrow cheaply for a variety of needs. They could grow crops, do business, set up small-scale indus- tries etc. They could set up new indus- tries or trade in goods. Cheap and affordable credit is crucial for the Formal and Informal Credit: Who gets what? Graph 2 shows the importance of formal and informal sources of credit for people in urban areas.  The people are divided into four groups, from poor to rich, as shown in the figure. Y see that 54 per cent of the loans taken by poor households in the urban areas are from informal sources. Compare this with the rich urban households. What do you find? Only 17 per cent of their loans are from informal sources, while 83 per cent are from formal sources. A similar pattern is also found in rural areas. The rich households are availing cheap credit from formal lenders whereas the poor households have to pay a large amount for What does all this suggest? First, the formal sector still meets only about half of the total credit needs of the rural people. The remaining credit needs are met from informal sources. Households with a few assets    Households       Households BLUE: Per cent of loans from the FORMAL sector ORANGE: Per cent of loans from the INFORMAL sector Graph 2: Of all the loans taken by urban households, what percentage was formal and what percentage was informal? Most loans from informal lenders carry a very high interest rate and do little to increase the income of the borrowers. Thus, it is necessary that banks and cooperatives increase their lending particularly in the rural areas, so that the dependence on informal sources of credit reduces. 1. What are the differences between formal and informal sources of credit? 2. Why should credit at reasonable rates be available for all? 3. Should there be a supervisor, such as the Reserve Bank of India, that looks into the loan activities of informal lenders? Why would its task be quite difficult? 4. Why do you think that the share of formal sector credit is higher for the richer households compared to the poorer households? LET S WORK THESE OUT SELF-HELP GROUPS FOR THE POOR Secondly, while formal sector loans need to expand, it is also necessary that everyone receives these loans. At present, it is the richer households who receive formal credit whereas the poor have to depend on the informal sources. It is important that the formal credit is distributed more equally so that the poor can benefit from the cheaper loans. In the previous section we have seen that poor households are still dependent on informal sources of credit. Why is it so? Banks are not present everywhere in rural India. Even when they are present, getting a loan from a bank is much more difficult than taking a loan from informal sources. As we saw for Megha, bank loans require proper documents and collateral. Absence of collateral is one of the major reasons which prevents the poor from getting bank loans. Informal lenders such as moneylenders, on the other hand, know the borrowers personally and hence are often willing to give a loan without collateral. The borrowers can, if necessary, approach the moneylenders even without repaying stitching a quilt DO YOU THINK A BANK WILL GIVE ME A their earlier loans. However, the moneylenders charge very high rates of interest, keep no records of the transactions and harass the poor In recent years, people have tried out some newer ways of providing loans to the poor. The idea is to organise rural poor, in particular women, into small Self Help Groups (SHGs) and pool (collect) their savings. A typical SHG has 15-20 members, usually belonging to one neighbourhood, who meet and save regularly. Saving per member varies from Rs 25 to Rs 100 or more, depending on the ability of the people to save. Members can take small loans from the group itself to meet their needs. The group charges interest on these loans but this is still less than what the moneylender charges. After a year or two, if the group is regular in savings, it becomes eligible for availing loan from the bank. Loan is sanctioned in the name of the group and is meant to create self- for the members. For instance, small loans are provided to the members for releasing mortgaged land, for meeting working capital needs (e.g. buying seeds, fertilisers, raw materials like bamboo and cloth), for housing materials, for acquiring assets like sewing machine, handlooms, cattle, Most of the important decisions regarding the savings and loan activities are taken by the group decides as regards the loans to be granted   the purpose, amount, interest to be charged, repayment schedule etc.  Also, it is the group which is responsible for the repayment of the loan. Any case of non- repayment of loan by any one member is followed up seriously by other members in the group. Because of this feature, banks are willing to lend to the poor women when organised in SHGs, even though they have no collateral as such. Thus, the SHGs help borrowers overcome the problem of lack of collateral. They can get timely loans for a variety of purposes and at a reasonable interest rate. Moreover, SHGs are the building blocks of organisation of the rural poor. Not only does it help women to become financially self-reliant, the regular meetings of the group provide a platform to discuss and act on a variety of social issues such as health, nutrition, domestic violence, etc. A women s self-help group meeting in Gujarat In this chapter we have looked at the modern forms of money and how they are linked with the banking system. On one side are the depositors who keep their money in the banks and on the other side are the borrowers who take loans from these banks. Economic activities require loans or credit. Credit, as we saw can have a positive impact, or in certain situations make the borrower worse off. Credit is available from a variety of sources. These can be either formal sources or informal sources. Terms of Grameen Bank of Bangladesh Grameen Bank of Bangladesh Grameen Bank of Bangladesh Grameen Bank of Bangladesh Grameen Bank of Bangladesh  If credit can be made available to the poor people on terms and conditions that are appropriate and reasonable these millions of small people with their millions of small pursuits can add up to create the biggest development wonder.  Professor Muhammad Yunus, the founder of Grameen Bank, and recipient of 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace credit vary substantially between formal and informal lenders. At present, it is the richer households who receive credit from formal sources whereas the poor have to depend on the informal sources. It is essential that the total formal sector credit increases so that the dependence on the more expensive informal credit becomes less. Also, the poor should get a much greater share of formal loans from banks, cooperative societies etc. Both these steps are important for development. Grameen Bank of Bangladesh is one of the biggest success stories in reaching the poor to meet their credit needs at reasonable rates. Started in the 1970s as a small project, Grameen Bank in 2018 had over 9 million members in about 81,600 villages spread across Bangladesh. Almost all of the borrowers are women and belong to poorest sections of the society. These borrowers have proved that not only are poor women reliable borrowers, but that they can start and run a variety of small income-generating activities successfully. In situations with high risks, credit might create further problems for the borrower. How does money solve the problem of double coincidence of wants? Explain with an example of your own. How do banks mediate between those who have surplus money and those who Look at a 10 rupee note. What is written on top? Can you explain this statement? Why do we need to expand formal sources of credit in India? What is the basic idea behind the SHGs for the poor? Explain in your own words. What are the reasons why the banks might not be willing to lend to certain borrowers? In what ways does the Reserve Bank of India supervise the functioning of banks? Why is this necessary? Analyse the role of credit for development. Manav needs a loan to set up a small business. On what basis will Manav decide whether to borrow from the bank or the moneylender? Discuss. In India, about 80 per cent of farmers are small farmers, who need credit for cultivation. (a) Why might banks be unwilling to lend to small farmers? (b) What are the other sources from which the small farmers can borrow? (c) Explain with an example how the terms of credit can be unfavourable for the (d) Suggest some ways by which small farmers can get cheap credit. Fill in the blanks: (i) Majority of the credit needs of the _________________households are met from informal sources. (ii) ___________________costs of borrowing increase the debt-burden. (iii) __________________  issues currency notes on behalf of the Central (iv) Banks charge a higher interest rate on loans than what they offer on (v) _______________ is an asset that the borrower owns and uses as a guarantee until the loan is repaid to the lender. Choose the most appropriate answer. (i) In a SHG most of the decisions regarding savings and loan activities are taken by (c) Non-government organisation. (ii) Formal sources of credit does not include The following table shows people in a variety of occupations in urban areas. What are the purposes for which the following people might need loans? Fill in the column. Reason for needing a Loan Graduate student who is computer literate A person employed in government service Migrant labourer in Delhi A worker whose factory has closed down Next, classify the people into two groups based on whom you think might get a bank loan and those who might not. What is the criterion that you have used for classification? ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY NOTES FOR THE TEACHER NOTES FOR THE TEACHER NOTES FOR THE TEACHER NOTES FOR THE TEACHER NOTES FOR THE TEACHER Most regions of the world are getting increasingly interconnected. While this interconnectedness across countries has many dimensions   cultural, political, social and economic   this chapter looks at globalisation in a more limited sense. It defines globalisation as the integration between countries through foreign trade and foreign investments by multinational corporations (MNCs). As you will notice, the more complex issues of portfolio investment have been If we look at the past thirty years or so, we find that MNCs have been a major force in the globalisation process connecting distant regions of the world. Why are the MNCs spreading their production to other countries and what are the ways in which they are doing so? The first part of the chapter discusses this. Rather than relying on quantitative estimates, the rapid rise and influence of the MNCs has been shown through a variety of examples, mainly drawn from the Indian context. Note that the examples are an aid to explain a more general point. While teaching, the emphasis should be on the ideas and examples are to be used as illustrations. You can also creatively use comprehension passages like the one given after Section II to test and reinforce new concepts. Integration of production and integration of markets is a key idea behind understanding the process of globalisation and its impact. This has been dealt with at length in this chapter, highlighting the role of MNCs in the process.  You have to ensure that the students grasp this idea with sufficient clarity, before moving on to the Globalisation has been facilitated by several factors. Three of these have been highlighted: rapid improvements in technology, liberalisation of trade and investment policies and, pressures from international organisations such as the WTO. Improvement in technology is a fascinating area for students and you may, with a few directions, encourage them to do their own explorations. While discussing liberalisation, you have to keep in mind that the students are unaware of what India was like in the pre-liberalisation era. A role-play could be conceived to compare and contrast the pre and post-liberalisation era. Similarly, international negotiations under WTO and the uneven balances in power are interesting subjects that can be covered in a discussion mode rather than The final section covers the impact of globalisation. To what extent has globalisation contributed to the development process? This section draws on the topics covered in Chapters 1 and 2 (for example, what is a fair development goal), which you can refer to. Also, examples and activities drawn from the local environment are a must while discussing this section. This might include contexts that have not been covered in the chapter, such as the impact of imports on local farmers, etc. Collective brainstorming sessions can be conducted to analyse such Sources for Information The call for a fairer globalisation has been given, among others, by the International Labour Organisation   www.ilo.org. Another interesting resource is the WTO website http://www.wto.org. It gives access to the variety of agreements that are being negotiated at the WTO.  For company related information, most MNCs have their own websites.  If you want to critically look at the MNCs, one recommended website is CHAPTER 4: GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY As consumers in today s world, some of us have a wide choice of goods and services before us. The latest models of digital cameras, mobile phones and televisions made by the leading manufacturers of the world are within our reach. Every season, new models of automobiles can be seen on Indian roads. Gone are the days when Ambassador and Fiat were the only cars on  Indian roads. Today, Indians are buying cars produced by nearly all the top companies in the world. A similar explosion of brands can be seen for many other goods: from shirts to televisions to processed fruit juices. Such wide-ranging choice of goods in our markets is a relatively recent phenomenon. You wouldn t have found such a wide variety of goods in Indian markets even two decades back. In a matter of years, our markets have been transformed! How do we understand these rapid transformations? What are the factors that are bringing about these changes? And, how are these changes affecting the lives of the people? We shall dwell on these questions in Until the middle of the twentieth century, production was largely organised within countries.  What crossed the boundaries of these countries were raw material, food stuff and finished products. Colonies such as India exported raw materials and food stuff and imported finished goods. Trade was the main channel connecting distant countries. This was before large companies called Spreading  of Production Spreading  of Production Spreading  of Production Spreading  of Production Spreading  of Production by an MNC by an MNC by an MNC by an MNC by an MNC A large MNC, producing industrial equipment, designs its products in research centres in the United States, and then has the components manufactured in China. These are then shipped to Mexico and Eastern Europe where the products are assembled and the finished products are sold all over the world. Meanwhile, the company s customer care is carried out through call centres located in India. PRODUCTION ACROSS COUNTRIES multinational corporations (MNCs) emerged on the scene. A MNC is a company that owns or controls production in more than one nation. MNCs set up offices and factories for production in regions where they can get cheap labour and other resources. This is done so that the cost of production is low and the MNCs can earn greater profits. Consider the This is a call centre in Bengaluru, equipped with telecom facilities and access to the Internet to provide information and support to customers abroad. Complete the following statement to show how the production process in the garment industry is spread across countries. The brand tag says  Made in Thailand  but they are not Thai products. We dissect the manufacturing process and look for the best solution at each step. We are doing it globally. In making garments, the company may, for example, get cotton fibre from Korea,........ LET S WORK THIS OUT In this example the MNC is not only selling its finished products globally, but more important, the goods and services are produced globally. As a result, production is organised in increasingly complex ways.  The production process is divided into small parts and spread out across the globe. In the above example, China provides the advantage of being a cheap manufacturing location. Mexico and Eastern Europe are useful for their closeness to the markets in the US and Europe. India has highly skilled engineers who can understand the technical aspects of production. It also has educated English speaking youth who can provide customer care services. And all this probably can mean 50-60 per cent cost-savings for the MNC! The advantage of spreading out production across the borders to the multinationals can be truly immense. INTERLINKING PRODUCTION ACROSS At times, MNCs set up production jointly with some of the local companies of these countries. The benefit to the local company of such joint production is two-fold. First, MNCs can provide money for additional investments, like buying new machines for faster production. Second, MNCs might bring with them the latest technology for production. In general, MNCs set up production where it is close to the markets; where there is skilled and unskilled labour available at low costs; and where the availability of other factors of production is assured. In addition, MNCs might look for government policies that look after their interests. You will read more about the policies later in the chapter. Having assured themselves of these conditions, MNCs set up factories and offices for production. The money that is spent to buy assets such as land, building, machines and other equipment is called investment. Investment made by MNCs is called foreign investment. Any investment is made with the hope that these assets will earn profits. WE WILL SHIFT THIS FACTORY TO IT HAS BECOME But the most common route for MNC investments is to buy up local companies and then to expand production. MNCs with huge wealth can quite easily do so. To take an example, Cargill Foods, a very large American MNC, has bought over smaller Indian companies such as Parakh Foods. Parakh Foods had built a large marketing network in various parts of India, where its brand was well-reputed. Also, Parakh Foods had four oil refineries, whose control has now shifted to Cargill. Cargill is now the largest producer of edible oil in India, with a capacity to make 5 million pouches daily! In fact, many of the top MNCs have wealth exceeding the entire budgets of the developing country governments. With such enormous wealth, imagine the power and influence of these MNCs! There s another way in which MNCs control production. Large MNCs in developed countries place orders for production with small producers. Garments, footwear, sports items are examples of industries where production is carried out by a large number of small producers around the world. The products are supplied to the MNCs, which then sell these under their own brand names to the customers. These large MNCs have tremendous power to determine price, quality, delivery, and labour conditions for these distant Thus, we see that there are a variety of ways in which the MNCs are spreading their production and interacting with local producers in various countries across the globe. By setting up partnerships with local companies, by using the local companies for supplies, by closely competing with the local companies or buying them up, MNCs are exerting a strong influence on production at these distant locations. As a result, production in these widely dispersed locations is getting Women at home in Ludhiana making footballs for large MNCs Jeans produced in developing countries being sold in USA for Rs 6500 ($145) Read the passage on the left and answer the questions. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Would you say Ford Motors is a MNC? Why? 2. What is foreign investment? How much did Ford Motors invest in India? 3. By setting up their production plants in India, MNCs such as Ford Motors tap the advantage not only of the large markets that countries such as India provide, but also the lower costs of production. Explain 4. Why do you think the company wants to develop India as a base for manufacturing car components for its global operations? Discuss the (a) cost of labour and other resources in India (b) the presence of several local manufacturers who supply auto- parts to Ford Motors (c) closeness to a large number of buyers in India and China 5. In what ways will the production of cars by Ford Motors in India lead to interlinking of production? 6. In what ways is a MNC different from other companies? 7. Nearly all major multinationals are American, Japanese or European, such as Nike, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Honda, Nokia. Can you guess why? For a long time foreign trade has been the main channel connecting countries. In history you would have read about the trade routes connecting India and South Asia to markets both in the East and West and the extensive trade that took place along these routes. Also, you would remember that it was trading interests which attracted various trading companies such as the East India Company to India. What then is the basic function of foreign trade? To put it simply, foreign trade creates an opportunity for the producers to reach beyond the domestic markets, i.e., markets of their own countries. Producers can sell their produce not only in markets located within the country but can also compete in markets located in other countries of the world. Similarly, for the buyers, import of goods produced in another country is one way of expanding the choice of goods beyond what is FOREIGN TRADE AND INTEGRATION OF MARKETS Ford Motors, an American company, is one of the world s largest automobile production spread over 26 countries of the world. Ford Motors came to India in 1995 and spent Rs. 1700 crore to set up a large plant near Chennai. This was done in Mahindra and Mahindra, a major Indian manufacturer of jeeps and trucks. By the year 2017, Ford Motors was selling 88,000 cars in the Indian while another 1,81,000 cars were exported from India to South Africa, Mexico, Brazil and United States of America. In recent years, Ford Company stopped producing cars for selling in India but export cars and car engines on a small scale to other Cars made by Indian workers being transported to be sold abroad by MNCs. Chinese Toys in India Chinese Toys in India Chinese Toys in India Chinese Toys in India Chinese Toys in India Chinese manufacturers learn of an  opportunity to export toys to India, where toys are sold at a high price. They start exporting plastic toys to India. Buyers in India now have the option of choosing between Indian and the Chinese toys. Because of the cheaper prices and new designs, Chinese toys become more popular in the Indian markets. Within a year, 70 to 80 per cent of the toy shops have replaced Indian toys with Chinese toys. Toys are now cheaper in the Indian markets than earlier. Let us see the effect of foreign trade through the example of Chinese toys in the Indian markets. What is happening here? As a result of trade, Chinese toys come into the Indian markets. In the competition between Indian and Chinese toys, Chinese toys prove better. Indian buyers have a greater choice of toys and at lower prices. For the Chinese toy makers, this provides an opportunity to expand business. The opposite is true for Indian toy makers. They face losses, as their toys are selling 1. What was the main channel connecting countries in the past? How is it different 2. Distinguish between foreign trade and foreign investment. 3. In recent years China has been importing steel from India. Explain how the import of steel by China will affect. (a) steel companies in China. (b) steel companies in India. (c) industries buying steel for production of other industrial goods in China. 4. How will the import of steel from India into the Chinese markets lead to integration of markets for steel in the two countries? Explain. LET S WORK THESE OUT In general, with the opening of trade, goods travel from one market to another. Choice of goods in the markets rises. Prices of similar goods in the two markets tend to become equal. And, producers in the two countries now closely compete against each other even though they are separated by thousands of miles! Foreign trade thus results in connecting the markets or integration of markets in  different In the past two to three decades, more and more MNCs have been looking for locations around the world which would be cheap for their production. Foreign investment by MNCs in these countries has been rising.  At the same time, foreign trade between countries has been rising rapidly. A large part of the foreign trade is also controlled by MNCs. For instance, the car manufacturing plant of Ford Motors in India not only produces cars for the Indian markets, it also exports cars to other developing countries and exports car components for its many factories around the world. Likewise, activities of most MNCs involve substantial trade in goods and also WHAT IS GLOBALISATION? BE CAREFUL! THAT S OUR WORLD YOU RE HAVE TO PAY THE Small traders of readymade garments facing stiff competition from both the MNC brands and imports. Rapid improvement in technology has been one major factor that has stimulated the globalisation process. For instance, the past fifty years have seen several improvements in transportation technology. This has made much faster delivery of goods across long distances possible at lower costs. The result of greater foreign investment and greater foreign trade has been greater integration of production and markets across countries. Globalisation is this process of rapid integration or interconnection between countries. MNCs are playing a major role in the globalisation process. More and more goods and services, investments and technology are moving between countries. Most regions of the world are in closer 1. What is the role of MNCs in the globalisation process? 2. What are the various ways in which countries can be 3. Choose the correct option. Globalisation, by connecting countries, shall result in (a) lesser competition among producers. (b) greater competition among producers. (c) no change in competition among producers. LET S WORK THESE OUT contact with each other than a few Besides the movements of goods, services, investments and technology, there is one more way in which the countries can be connected. This is through the movement of people between countries. People usually move from one country to another in search of better income, better jobs or better education. In the past few decades, however, there has not been much increase in the movement of people between countries due to transport of goods Goods are placed in containers that can be loaded intact onto ships, railways, planes and trucks. Containers have led to huge reduction in port handling costs and increased the speed with which exports can reach markets. Similarly, the cost of air transport has fallen.  This has enabled much greater volumes of goods being transported by airlines. FACTORS THAT HAVE ENABLED GLOBALISATION...WE VE SEEN GREAT IMPROVEMENTS amazing world of internet, where you can obtain and share information on almost anything you want to know. Internet also allows us to send instant electronic mail (e-mail) and talk (voice-mail) across the world at Even more remarkable have been the developments in information and communication technology.  In recent times, technology in the areas of telecommunications, computers, Internet has been changing rapidly. Telecommunication facilities (tele- graph, telephone including mobile phones, fax) are used to contact one another around the world, to access information instantly, and to communicate from remote areas. This has been facilitated by satellite communication devices. As you would be aware, computers have now entered almost every field of activity. You might have also ventured into the Using IT in Using IT in Using IT in Using IT in Using IT in Information and communication technology (or IT in short) has played a major role in spreading out production of services across countries. Let us see how. 1. In the above example, underline the words describing the use of technology in production. 2. How is information technology connected with globalisation? Would globalisation have been possible without expansion of IT? LET S WORK THESE OUT A news magazine published for London readers is to be designed and printed in Delhi. The text of the magazine is sent through Internet to the Delhi office. The designers in the Delhi office get orders on how to design the magazine from the office in London using telecommunication facilities. The designing is done on a computer. After printing, the magazines are  sent by air to London. Even the payment of money for designing and printing from a bank in London to a bank in Delhi is done instantly through the Internet NO, MY CHILD! THIS PRINTING PRESS IS NOT FOR ORDINARY INDIANS! IT LOOKS LIKE A VERY NICE MAGAZINE. BUT WHY ISN T MY TEXTBOOK PRINTED LIKE THIS? I CAN HARDLY READ THE WORDS IN MY BOOK! Liberalisation of foreign trade and foreign investment Let us return to the example of imports of Chinese toys in India. Suppose the Indian government puts a tax on import of toys. What would happen? Those who wish to import these toys would have to pay tax on this. Because of the tax, buyers will have to pay a higher price on imported toys. Chinese toys will no longer be as cheap  in the Indian markets and imports from China will automatically reduce. Indian toy-makers will prosper. Tax on imports is an example of trade barrier. It is called a barrier because some restriction has been set up. Governments can use trade barriers to increase or decrease (regulate) foreign trade and to decide what kinds of goods and how much of each, should come into the country. The Indian government, after Independence, had put barriers to foreign trade and foreign investment. This was considered necessary to protect the producers within the country  from foreign competition. Industries were just coming up in the 1950s and 1960s, and competition from imports at that stage would not have allowed these industries to come up. Thus, India allowed imports of only essential items such as machinery, fertilisers, petroleum etc. Note that all developed countries, during the early stages of development, have given protection to domestic producers through a variety Starting around 1991, some far- reaching changes in policy were made in India.  The government decided that the time had come for Indian producers to compete with producers around the globe. It felt that competition would improve the performance of producers within the country since they would have to improve their quality. This decision Thus, barriers on foreign trade and foreign investment were removed to a large extent. This meant that goods could be imported and exported easily and also foreign companies could set up factories and offices Removing barriers or restrictions set by the government is what is known as liberalisation. With liberalisation of trade, businesses are allowed to make decisions freely about what they wish to import or export. The government imposes much less restrictions than before and is therefore said to be more 1. What do you understand by liberalisation of foreign trade? 2. Tax on imports is one type of trade barrier. The government could also place a limit on the number of goods that can be imported. This is known as quotas.  Can you explain, using the example of Chinese toys, how quotas can be used as trade barriers? Do you think this should be used? Discuss. LET S WORK THESE OUT developed countries, WTO establishes rules regarding international trade, and sees that these rules are obeyed. About 160 countries of the world are currently members of the WTO. Though WTO is supposed to allow free trade for all, in practice, it is seen that the developed countries have unfairly retained trade barriers. On the other hand, WTO rules have forced the developing countries to remove trade barriers. An example of this is the current debate on trade in We have seen that the liberalisation of foreign trade and investment in India was supported by some very powerful international organisations. These organisations say that all barriers to foreign trade and investment are harmful. There should be no barriers. Trade between countries should be  free. All countries in the world should liberalise their policies. World Trade Organisation (WTO) is one such organisation whose aim is to liberalise international trade. Started at the initiative of the WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION Debate on Trade Practices Debate on Trade Practices Debate on Trade Practices Debate on Trade Practices Debate on Trade Practices Developing countries are, therefore, asking the developed country governments,  We have reduced trade barriers as per WTO rules. But you have ignored the rules of WTO and have continued to pay your farmers vast sums of money.  You have asked our governments to stop supporting our farmers, but you are doing so yourselves. Is this free and fair trade? Is this free and fair trade? Is this free and fair trade? Is this free and fair trade? Is this free and fair trade?  You have seen in Chapter 2, that the agriculture sector provides the bulk of employment and a significant portion of the GDP in India. Compare this to a developed country such as the US with the share of agriculture in GDP at 1% and its share in total employment a tiny 0.5%! And yet this very small percentage of people agriculture in the US  receive massive sums of money from the US government for production and for exports to other countries. Due to this massive money that they receive, US farmers can sell abnormally low prices. The surplus farm products are sold in other country markets at low prices, adversely affecting farmers in these A typical cotton farm in USA consists of thousands of acres owned by a huge corporation that will sell cotton abroad at lowered prices. In the last twenty years, globalisation of the Indian economy has come a long way. What has been its effect on the lives of people? Let us look at some of the evidence. competition among producers - both local and foreign producers - has been of advantage to consumers, particularly the well-off sections in the urban areas. There is greater choice before these consumers who now enjoy improved quality and lower prices for several products. As a result, these people today, enjoy much higher standards of living than was Among producers and workers, the impact of globalisation has not Firstly, MNCs have increased their investments in India over the past 20 years, which means investing in India has been beneficial for them. MNCs have been interested in industries such as cell phones, automobiles, electronics, soft drinks, fast food or services such as banking in urban areas. These products have a large number of well-off  buyers. In these industries and services, new jobs have been created. Also, local companies supplying raw materials, etc. to these industries have prospered. 1. Fill in the blanks. WTO was started at the initiative of __________countries. The aim of the WTO is to ____________________.   WTO establishes rules regarding  ________________  for all countries, and sees that ___________________   In practice, trade between countries is not ______________________________.  Developing countries like India have ___________________, whereas developed countries, in many cases, have continued to provide protection to their producers. 2. What do you think can be done so that trade between countries is more fair? 3. In the above example, we saw that the US government gives massive sums of money to farmers for production. At times, governments also give support  to promote production of certain types of goods, such as those which are environmentally friendly. Discuss whether these are fair or not. LET S WORK THESE OUT IMPACT OF GLOBALISATION IN INDIA are some Indian companies which are spreading their operations Globalisation has also created new opportunities for companies providing services, particularly those involving IT. The Indian company producing a magazine for the London based company and call centres are some examples.  Besides, a host of services such as data entry, account- ing, administrative tasks, engineering are now being done cheaply in countries such as India and are exported to the developed countries. Secondly, several of the top Indian companies have been able to benefit from the increased competition. They have invested in newer technology and production methods and raised their production standards. Some have gained from successful collaborations with foreign companies. Moreover, globalisation has enabled some large Indian companies to emerge as multinationals themselves! Tata Motors (auto- mobiles), Infosys (IT), Ranbaxy (medicines), Asian Paints (paints), Sundaram Fasteners (nuts and bolts) 1. How has competition benefited people in India? 2. Should more Indian companies emerge as MNCs? How would it benefit the people in 3. Why do governments try to attract more foreign investment? 4. In Chapter 1, we saw what may be development for one may be destructive for others. The setting of SEZs has been opposed by some people in India. Find out who are these people and why are they opposing it. LET S WORK THESE OUT In recent years, the central and state governments in India are taking special steps to attract foreign companies to invest in India. Industrial zones, called Special Economic Zones (SEZs), are being set up. SEZs are to have world class facilities: electricity, water, roads, transport, storage, recreational and educational facilities. Companies who set up production units in the SEZs do not have to pay taxes for an initial period of Government has also allowed flexibility in the labour laws to attract foreign investment. You have seen in Chapter 2 that the companies in the organised sector have to obey certain rules that aim to protect the workers  rights. In the recent years, the government has allowed companies to ignore many of these. Instead of hiring workers on a regular basis, companies hire workers  flexibly  for short periods when there is intense pressure of work. This is done to reduce the cost of labour for the company. However, still not satisfied, foreign companies are demanding more flexibility in labour laws. Steps to Attract Foreign Investment Steps to Attract Foreign Investment Steps to Attract Foreign Investment Steps to Attract Foreign Investment Steps to Attract Foreign Investment Small producers: Compete or perish For a large number of small producers and workers globalisation has posed major Batteries, capacitors, plastics, toys, tyres, dairy products, and vegetable oil are some examples of industries where the small manufacturers have been hit hard due to competition. Several of the units have shut down rendering many workers jobless. The small and medium industries in India employ the largest number of workers (11 crores) in the country, next only to agriculture. 1. What are the ways in which Ravi s small production unit was affected by rising competition? 2. Should producers such as Ravi stop production because their cost of production is higher compared to producers in other countries? What do you think? 3. Recent studies point out that small producers in India need three things to compete better in the market (a) better roads, power, water, raw materials, marketing and information network (b) improvements and modernisation of technology (c) timely availability of credit at reasonable interest rates. Can you explain how these three things would help Indian producers? Do you think MNCs will be interested in investing in these? Why? Do you think the government has a role in making these facilities available? Why? Can you think of any other step that the government could take? Discuss. LET S WORK THESE OUT used to buy different components including capacitors in bulk for the manufacture of television sets. However, competition from the MNC brands forced the Indian television companies to move into assembling activities for MNCs. Even when some of them bought capacitors, they would prefer to import as the price of the imported item was half the price charged by people like Ravi. Ravi now produces less than half the capacitors that he produced in the year 2000 and has only seven workers working for him. Many of Ravi s friends in the same business in Hyderabad and Chennai have closed their units. Ravi did not expect that he would have to face a crisis in such a short period of his life as industrialist. Ravi took a loan from the bank to start his own company producing capacitors in 1992 in Hosur, an industrial town in Tamil Nadu. Capacitors are used in many electronic home appliances including tube lights, television etc.  Within three years, he was able to expand production and had 20 workers working under him. His struggle to run his company started when the government removed restrictions on  imports of capacitors as per its agreement at WTO in 2001. His main clients, the television companies, Competition and Uncertain Employment Globalisation and the pressure of competition have substantially changed the lives of workers. Faced with growing competition, most employers these days prefer to employ workers  flexibly. This means that workers  jobs are no longer secure. A Garment Worker A Garment Worker A Garment Worker A Garment Worker A Garment Worker 35 year old Sushila has spent many years as a worker in garment export industry of Delhi. She was employed as a  permanent worker  entitled to health insurance, provident fund, overtime at a double rate, when Sushila s factory closed in the late 1990s.  After searching for a job  for six months, she finally got a job  30 km. away from where she lives. Even after working in this factory for several years, she is a temporary worker and earns less than half of what she was earning earlier. Sushila leaves her house every morning, seven days a week at 7:30 a.m. and returns at 10 p.m.  A day off from work means no wage. She has none of the benefits she used to get earlier. Factories closer to her home have widely fluctuating orders and therefore pay even less. Let us see how the workers in the garment export industry in India are having to bear this pressure of competition. Large MNCs in the garment industry in Europe and America order their products from Indian exporters. These large MNCs with worldwide network look for the cheapest goods in order to maximise their profits. To get these large orders, Indian garment exporters try hard to cut their own costs. As cost of raw materials cannot be reduced, exporters try to cut labour costs. Where earlier a factory used to employ workers on a permanent basis, now they employ workers only on a temporary basis so that they do not have to pay workers for the whole year. Workers also have to put in very long working hours and work night shifts on a regular basis during the peak season. Wages are low and workers are forced to work overtime to make both ends meet. While this competition among the garment exporters has allowed the MNCs to make large profits, workers are denied their fair share of benefits brought about by globalisation. Factory workers folding garments for export. Though globalisation has created opportunities for paid work for women, the condition of employment shows that women are denied their fair share of benefits. The conditions of work and the hardships of the workers described above have become common to many industrial units and services in India. Most workers, today, are employed in the unorganised sector. Moreover, increasingly conditions of work in the organised sector have come to resemble the unorganised sector. Workers in the organised sector such as Sushila no longer get the protection and benefits that they enjoyed earlier. that labour laws are properly implemented and the workers get their rights. It can support small performance till the time they become strong enough to compete. If necessary, the government can use trade and investment barriers. It can negotiate at the WTO for  fairer rules. It can also align with other developing countries with similar interests to fight against the domination of developed countries in the WTO. In the past few years, massive campaigns and  representation by influenced important decisions relating to trade and investments at the WTO. This has demonstrated that people also can play an important role in the struggle for fair The above evidence indicates that not everyone has benefited from globalisation. People with education, skill and wealth have made the best use of the new opportunities. On the other hand, there are many people who have not shared the benefits. Since globalisation is now a reality, the question is how to make globalisation more  fair ? Fair globalisation would create opportunities for all, and also ensure that the benefits of globalisation are The government can play a major role in making this possible. Its policies must protect the interests, not only of the rich and the powerful, but all the people in the country. You have read about some of the possible steps that the government can take. For instance, the government can ensure 1. In what ways has competition affected workers, Indian exporters and foreign MNCs in the garment industry? 2. What can be done by each of the following so that the workers can get a fair share of benefits brought by globalisation? (b) employers at the exporting factories 3. One of the present debates in India is whether companies should have flexible policies for employment. Based on what you have read in the chapter, summarise the point of view of the employers and workers. LET S WORK THESE OUT THE STRUGGLE FOR A FAIR GLOBALISATION A demonstration against WTO in Hong Kong, 2005 In this chapter, we looked at the present phase of globalisation. Globalisation is the process of rapid integration of countries. This is happening through greater foreign trade and foreign investment. MNCs are playing a major role in the globalisation process. More and more MNCs are looking for locations around the world that are cheap for their production. As a result, production is being organised in complex ways. Technology, particularly IT, has played a big role in organising production across countries.  In addition, liberalisation of trade and investment has facilitated globalisation by removing investment.  At the inter- national level, WTO has put pressure on developing coun- tries to liberalise trade and While globalisation has benefited well-off consumers and also producers with skill, education and wealth, many small producers and workers have suffered as a result of the rising competition.  Fair globalisation would create opportunities for all, and also ensure that the benefits of globalisation are shared better. What do you understand by globalisation? Explain in your own words. 2. What were the reasons for putting barriers to foreign trade and foreign investment by the Indian government? Why did it wish to remove these barriers? 3. How would flexibility in labour laws help companies? 4. What are the various ways in which MNCs set up, control or produce in other countries? 5. Why do developed countries want developing countries to liberalise their trade and investment?  What do you think should the developing countries demand in return? 6.  The impact of globalisation has not been uniform.  Explain this statement. 7. How has liberalisation of trade and investment policies helped the globalisation 8. How does foreign trade lead to integration of markets across countries? Explain with an example other than those given here. 9. Globalisation will continue in the future. Can you imagine what the world would be like twenty years from now? Give reasons for your answer. 10.Supposing you find two people arguing: One is saying globalisation has hurt our country s development. The other is telling, globalisation is helping India develop. How would you respond to these arguments? 11.Fill in the blanks. Indian buyers have a greater choice of goods than they did two decades back. This is closely associated with the process of ______________. Markets in India are selling goods produced in many other countries. This means there is increasing ______________ with other countries. Moreover, the rising number of brands that we see in the markets might be produced by MNCs in India. MNCs are investing in India because _____________ ___________________________________________.  While consumers have more choices in the market, the effect of rising _______________ and ______________has meant greater _________________among the producers. 12.Match the following. (i) MNCs buy at cheap rates from small (ii) Quotas and taxes on imports are used to (b) Garments, footwear, sports (iii) Indian companies who have invested abroad (c) Call centres (iv) IT has helped in spreading of (d) Tata Motors, Infosys, Ranbaxy production of services (v) Several MNCs have invested in setting (e) Trade barriers up factories in India for production ADDITIONAL ACTIVITY / PROJECT 13.Choose the most appropriate option. The past two decades of globalisation has seen rapid movements in (a) goods, services and people between countries. (b) goods, services and investments between countries. (c) goods, investments and people between countries. The most common route for investments by MNCs in countries around the world is to (a) set up new factories. (b) buy existing local companies. (c) form partnerships with local companies. (iii) Globalisation has led to improvement in living conditions (a) of all the people (b) of people in the developed countries (c) of workers in the developing countries (d) none of the above Take some branded products that we use everyday (soaps, toothpaste, garments, electronic goods, etc.). Check which of these are produced by MNCs. II. Take any Indian industry or service of your choice. Collect information and photographs from newspapers, magazine clippings, books, television, internet, interviews with people on the following aspects of the industry. (i) Various producers/companies in the industry (ii) Is the product exported to other countries? (iii) Are there MNCs among the producers? (iv) Competition in the industry (v) Conditions of work in the industry (vi) Has there been any major change in the industry in the past 15 years? (vii) Problems that people in the industry face. NOTES FOR THE TEACHER This chapter proposes to discuss the issue of consumer rights within the context of the ways markets operate in our country. There are many aspects of unequal situations in a market and poor enforcement of rules and regulations. Hence, there is a need to sensitise learners and encourage them to participate in the consumer movement. This chapter provides case histories   how some consumers were exploited  in real life situation and how legal institutions helped consumers  in getting compensated and in upholding their rights. The case histories would enable the students to link these narratives to their life experiences. We have to enable students to understand that the awareness of being a well-informed consumer arose out of consumer movement and active participation of people through their struggles over a long period. This chapter also provides details of a few organisations helping consumers in different ways. Finally, it ends with some critical issues of the consumer movement in India. Aspects of Teaching / Sources of This chapter has questions, case studies and activities. It would be preferred that students discuss these in groups orally. Some of these could be answered in writing individually. While carrying out each activity you could start with a brainstorming session about the activity. Similarly, there are many opportunities for roleplay in this chapter and this could be a useful way to share their experiences and understand the issues at a deeper level. Making CHAPTER 5: CONSUMER RIGHTS posters collectively is another way to think about these issues. This lesson contains activities, which require visits   visit to consumer protection councils, consumer organisations, District/State/National level Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions, retail shops, marketplaces, etc. Organise the visits to maximise learners  experience.  Have a discussion with them about the purpose of the visit, things they need to do beforehand and things that need to be collected and the task (report/ project / article, etc.) they would carry out after the visit. As part of this chapter, the learners may do letter-writing and speaking activities. We may have to be sensitive to the language aspect of exercises. This chapter contains material collected from authenticated websites, books, newspapers and magazines. For example, https://consumer affairs.nic.in is a website of Central Government Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. Another website www.cuts- international.org is the website of a consumer organisation working in India for 40 years. It publishes a variety of material to create consumer awareness in India. They need to be shared among learners so that they can also collect material as part of their activities. For example, case histories were taken from newspaper clippings and consumers who fought in Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions. Let learners collect and read such material from different sources: consumer protection councils, Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions The collage you see below contains some news clippings of Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission verdicts. Why did the people go to these organisations in these cases? These verdicts came about because some people persisted and struggled to get justice. In what ways were they denied justice? More importantly, what are the ways in which they can exercise their rights as consumers to get a fair deal from the sellers when they felt they had been denied a just We participate in the market both as producers and consumers. As producers of goods and services we could be working in any of the sectors discussed earlier such as agriculture, industry, or services. Consumers participate in the market when they purchase goods and services that they need. These are the final goods that people as consumers use. In the preceding chapters we discussed the need for rules and regulations or steps that would promote development. These could be for the protection of workers in the unorganised sector or to protect people from high interest rates charged by moneylenders  in the informal sector. Similarly, rules and regulations are also required for protecting the environment. For example, moneylenders in the informal sector that you read about in Chapter 3 adopt various tricks to bind the borrower: they could make the producer sell the produce to them at a low rate in return for a timely loan; they could force a small farmer like Swapna to sell her land to pay back the loan. Similarly, many people who work in the unorganised sector have to work at a low wage and accept conditions that are not fair and are also often harmful to their health. To prevent such exploitation, we have talked of rules and regulations for their protection. There are organisations that have struggled for long to ensure that these rules are THE CONSUMER IN THE MARKETPLACE Likewise, rules and regulations are required for the protection of the consumers in the marketplace. Individual consumers often find themselves in a weak position. Whenever there is a complaint regarding a good or service that had been bought, the seller tries to shift all the responsibility on to the buyer. Their position usually is    If you didn t like what you bought, please go elsewhere. As if the seller has no responsibility once a sale is completed! The consumer movement, as we shall discuss later, is an effort to change this situation. Exploitation in the marketplace happens in various ways. For example, sometimes traders indulge in unfair trade practices such as when shopkeepers weigh less than what they should or when traders add charges that were not mentioned before, or when adulterated/defective goods are sold. Markets do not work in a fair manner when producers are few and powerful whereas consumers purchase in small amounts and are scattered. This happens especially when large companies are producing these goods. These companies with huge wealth, power and reach can manipulate the market in various ways. At times false information is passed on through the media, and other sources to attract consumers. For example, a company for years sold powder milk for babies all over THEY PURPOSELY MADE IT SO IT WOULD FALL APART AFTER A FEW MONTHS SO THAT I WILL BUY A NEW ONE! 1. What are the various ways by which people may be exploited in the market? 2. Think of one example from your experience where you thought that there was some  cheating  in the market. Discuss in the classroom. 3. What do you think should be the role of government to protect consumers? LET S WORK THESE OUT the world as the most scientific product claiming this to be better than mother s milk. It took years of struggle before the company was forced to accept that it had been making false claims. Similarly, a long battle had to be fought with court cases to make cigarette- manufacturing companies accept that their product could cause cancer. Hence, there is a need for rules and regulations to ensure protection for quality of goods and services on the In India, the consumer movement as a  social force  originated with the necessity of protecting and promoting the interests of consumers against unethical and unfair trade practices. Rampant food shortages, hoarding, black marketing, adulteration of food and edible oil gave birth to the consumer movement in an organised form in the 1960s. Till the 1970s, consumer organisations were largely engaged in writing articles and holding exhibitions. They formed consumer groups to look into the malpractices in ration shops and overcrowding in the road passenger transport. More recently, India witnessed an upsurge in the number of consumer groups. The consumer movement arose out of dissatisfaction of the consumers as many unfair practices were being indulged in by the sellers. There was no legal system available to consumers to protect them from exploitation in the marketplace. For a long time, when a consumer was not happy with a particular brand product or shop, he or she generally avoided buying that brand product, or would stop purchasing from that shop. It was presumed that it was the responsibility of consumers to be careful while buying a commodity or service. It took many years for organisations in India, and around the world, to create awareness amongst people. This has also shifted the responsibility of ensuring TOBACCO KILLS PEOPLE, BUT WHO CAN SAY THAT SHOULD NOT BE FREE TO SELL TOBACCO? 1. What could have been the steps taken by consumer groups? 2. There may be rules and regulations but they are often not followed. Why? Discuss. LET S WORK THESE OUT In 1985 United Nations adopted the UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection. This was a tool for nations to adopt measures to protect consumers and for consumer advocacy groups to press their governments to do so. At the international level, this has become the foundation for consumer movement. Today, Consumers International has become an umbrella body to over 200 member organisations from over 100 countries. Because of all these efforts, the movement succeeded in bringing pressure on business firms as well as government to correct business conduct which may be unfair and against the interests of consumers at large. A major step taken in 1986 by the Indian government was the enactment of the Consumer Protection Act 1986, popularly known as COPRA. You will learn more about COPRA later. SAFETY IS EVERYONE S RIGHT Reji s suffering shows how a hospital, due to negligence by the doctors and staff in giving anaesthesia, crippled a student for life. While using many goods and services, we as consumers, have the right to be protected against the marketing of goods and delivery of services that are hazardous to life and property. Producers need to strictly follow the required safety rules and regulations. There are many goods and services that we purchase that require special attention to safety. For example, pressure cookers have a safety valve which, if it is defective, can cause a serious accident. The manufacturers of the safety valve have to ensure high quality. You also need public or government action to see that this quality is maintained. However, we do find bad quality products in the market because the supervision of these rules is weak and the consumer movement is also not 1. For the following (you can add to the list) products/services discuss what safety rules should be observed by the producer? (a) LPG cylinder (b) cinema theatre (c) circus (d) medicines (e) edible oil (f) marriage pandal (g) a high-rise building. 2. Find out any case of accident or negligence from people around you, where you think that the responsibility lay with the producer. Discuss. LET S WORK THESE OUT Reji Mathew, a healthy boy studying in Class IX, was admitted in a private clinic in Kerala for removal of tonsils. An ENT surgeon performed the tonsillectomy operation under general anaesthesia. As a result of improper anaesthesia Reji showed symptoms of some brain abnormalities because of which he was crippled for life. His father filed a complaint in the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission claiming compensation of Rs 5,00,000 for medical negligence and deficiency, in service. The State Commission, saying that the evidence was not sufficient, dismissed it. Reji s father appealed again in the National Consumer Disputes Redressal in New Delhi. The after looking into the complaint, held the for medical negligence and directed it to pay Information about goods and When you buy any commodity, you will find certain details given on the packing. These details are about ingredients used, price, batch number, date of manufacture, expiry date and the address of the manufacturer. When we buy medicines, on the packets, you might find  directions for proper use  and information relating to side effects and risks associated with usage of that medicine. When you buy garments, you will find information on  instructions for washing. Why is it that rules have been made so that the manufacturer displays this information? It is because consumers have the right to be informed about the particulars of goods and services that they purchase. Consumers can then complain and ask for compensation or replacement if the product proves to be defective in any manner. For example, if we buy a product and find it defective well within the expiry period, we can ask for a replacement. If the expiry period was not printed, the manufacturer would blame the shopkeeper and will not accept the responsibility. If people sell medicines that have expired severe action can be taken against them. Similarly, one can protest and complain if someone sells a good at more than the printed price on the packet. This is indicated by  MRP    maximum retail price. In fact consumers can bargain with the seller to sell at less than the MRP. In recent times, the right to information has been expanded to cover various services provided by the Government. In October 2005, the Government of India enacted a law, popularly known as RTI (Right to Information) Act, which ensures its citizens all the information about the functions of government departments. The effect of the RTI Act can be understood from the following case. Amritha, an engineering graduate after submitting all the certificates and attending the interview for a job in a government department, did not receive any news of the result. The officials also refused to comply with her queries. She therefore filed an application using the RTI Act saying that it was her right to know the result in a reasonable time so that she could plan her future. She was  not only informed about the reasons for delay in the declaration of results but also got her call letter for appointment as she performed well in the interview. 1. When we buy commodities we find that the price charged is sometimes higher or lower than the Maximum Retail Price printed on the pack.  Discuss the possible reasons. Should consumer groups do something about this? 2. Pick up a few packaged goods that you want to buy and examine the information given. In what ways are they useful? Is there some information that you think should be given on those packaged goods but is not? Discuss. 3. People make complaints about the lack of civic amenities such as bad roads or poor water and health facilities but no one listens. Now the RTI Act gives you the power to question. Do you agree? Discuss. LET S WORK THESE OUT Abirami, a student of Ansari Nagar, joined a two-year course at a local coaching institute for professional courses in New Delhi. At the time of joining the course, she paid the fees Rs 61,020 as lumpsum for the entire course of two years. However, she decided to opt out of the course at the end of one year as she found that the quality of teaching was not up to the mark. When she asked for a refund of the fee for one year, it was denied to her. When she filed the case in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, the Commission directed the Institute to refund Rs 28,000 saying that she had the right to choose. The Institute again appealed in the State Consumer Com-mission. The State Commission upheld the direction and further fined the institute Rs 25,000 for a frivolous appeal. It also directed the institute to pay Rs 7000 as compensation and The State Commission also restrained all the educational and professional institutions in the state from charging fees from students for the entire duration of the course in advance and that too at one go. Any violation of this order may invite penalties and imprisonment, the commission said. if you buy a toothbrush. If you are not interested in buying the brush, your right to choice is denied. Similarly, sometimes gas supply dealers insist that you have to buy the stove from them when you take a new connection. In this way many a times you are forced to buy things that you may not wish to and you are left with no choice. What do we understand from this incident? Any consumer who receives a service in whatever capacity, regardless of age, gender and nature of service, has the right to choose continue to receive the service. Suppose you want to buy toothpaste, and the shop owner says that she can sell the toothpaste only When choice is denied Where should consumers go to get justice? Read again the cases of Reji Mathew and Abirami given earlier in the These are some examples in which consumers are denied their rights. Such instances occur quite often in our country. Where should these consumers go to get justice? Consumers have the right to seek redressal against unfair trade practices and exploitation. If any damage is done to a consumer, she has the right to get compensation depending on the degree of damage. There is a need to provide an easy and effective public system by which this can be done. The following are some of the catchy advertisements of products that we purchase from the market. Which of the following offers would really benefit consumers? Discuss. 15 gm more in every 500 gm pack. Subscribe for a newspaper with a gift at the end of a year. Scratch and win gifts worth Rs 10 lakhs. A milk chocolate inside a 500 gram glucose box. Win a gold coin inside a pack. Buy shoes worth Rs 2000 and get one pair of shoes worth Rs 500 free. LET S WORK THIS OUT The consumer can file a complaint before the appropriate consumer forum on his/her own with or without the services of lawyers. You might be interested in knowing how an aggrieved person gets his or her compensation. Let us take the case of Prakash. He had sent a money-order to his village for his daughter s marriage. The money did not reach his daughter at the time when she needed it nor did it reach months later.  Prakash filed a case in a district level Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission in New Delhi. All the steps he undertook are illustrated here. These days consumer as an individual or as a group (called class action suit) file a complaint both Physically or through internet and conduct the case through video 1. PRAKASH GOES TO THE POST OFFICE TO SEND MONEY ORDER TO HIS DAUGHTER 2.  PRAKASH COMES TO KNOW THAT THE MONEY HAS NOT REACHED HIS DAUGHTER 3.  PRAKASH ENQUIRES ABOUT THE MONEY ORDER IN THE POST OFFICE 4.  THE POST OFFICE DOES NOT RESPOND TO THE QUERY SATISFACTORILY 5.  PRAKASH GOES TO THE LOCAL CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCIL FOR ADVICE 7.  HE HIMSELF PLEADS THE CASE IN 9. THE JUDGE ANNOUNCES THE DISPUTES REDRESSAL 8.  THE COMMISSION OFFICE JUDGE VERIFIES THE DOCUMENTS AND HEARS THE ARGUMENTS OF BOTH THE AGGRIEVED PARTY AND THE OTHER PARTY 6.  PRAKASH GOES TO A CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION TO FILE A CASE. HE FILLS A REGISTRATION FORM. THE COMMISSION SENDS NOTICE TO THE OTHER PARTY The consumer movement in India has led to the formation of various organisations, locally known as consumer forums or consumer protection councils. They guide consumers on how to file cases in the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions. On many occasions, they also represent individual consumers in these commissions. These voluntary organisations also receive financial support from the government for creating awareness If you are living in a residential colony, you might have noticed boards of Residents  Welfare Associations. If there is any unfair trade practice meted out to their members, they take up the case on Under COPRA, a three-tier quasi- judicial machinery at the district, state Arrange the following in the correct order. (a) Arita files a case in the District Consumer Disputes (b) She engages a professional person. (c) She realises that the dealer has given her defective (d) She starts attending the commission proceedings. (e) She goes and complains to the dealer and the Branch office, to no effect. (f) She is asked to produce the bill and warranty before (g) She purchases a wall clock from a retail outlet. (h) Within a few months, the dealer was ordered by the commission to replace her old wall clock with a brand new one at no extra cost. LET S WORK THIS OUT LEARNING TO BECOME WELL-INFORMED When we as consumers become conscious of our rights, while purchasing various goods and services, we will be able to distinguish and make informed choices. This and national levels was set up for redressal of consumer disputes. The district-level authority called District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission deals with the cases involving claims up to Rs 1 crore, the state-level Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions called State Commission between Rs 1 crore and Rs 10 crore and the national-level commission   National Commission   deals with cases involving claims exceeding Rs 10 crore. If a case is commission, a consumer can also appeal in the state and then in Thus, the Act has enabled us as consumers to have the right to represent in the Consumer Disputes calls for acquiring the knowledge and skill to become a well-informed consumer. How do we become conscious of our rights? Look at the posters on the right and in the previous page. What do you think? The enactment of COPRA has led to the setting up of separate Departments of Consumer Affairs in central and state governments. The posters that you have seen are one example through which government spread information about legal process which people can use. You might also be seeing such advertisements on television channels. ISI and Agmark ISI and Agmark ISI and Agmark ISI and Agmark ISI and Agmark While buying many commodities, on the cover, you might have seen a logo with the letters ISI, Agmark, Hallmark or +F. These logos and certification help consumers get assured of quality while purchasing the goods and services. The organisations that monitor and issue these certificates allow producers to use their logos provided they follow certain quality standards. Though these organisations develop quality standards for many products, it is not compulsory for all the producers to follow standards. However, for some products that affect the health and safety of consumers or of products of mass consumption like LPG cylinders, food colours and additives, cement, packaged drinking water, it is mandatory on the part of the producers to get certified by these organisations. India has been observing 24 December as the National Consumers  Day. It was on this day that the Indian Parliament enacted the Consumer Protection Act in 1986. India is one of the countries that have exclusive authority for consumer redressal. The consumer movement in India has made some progress in terms of numbers of organised groups and their activities. There are today more than 2000 consumer groups in the country of which only about 50-60 are well organised and recognised for However, the consumer redressal process is becoming cumbersome, expensive and time consuming. Many a time, consumers are required to engage lawyers. These cases require Look at the posters and cartoons in this chapter. Think of any particular commodity and the aspects that need to be looked at as a consumer. Design a poster for this. Find out the nearest Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission for your area. What is the difference between consumer protection council and Consumer Disputes The Consumer Protection Act 1986 ensures the following as rights which every consumer in India should possess (i) Right to choice. Right to representation. (ii) Right to information. Right to safety. (iii) Right to redressal. Right to consumer education. Categorise the following cases under different heads and mark against each in (a) Lata got an electric shock from a newly purchased iron. She complained to the shopkeeper immediately. (      ) (b) John is dissatisfied with the services provided by MTNL/BSNL/TATA INDICOM for the past few months. He files a case in the District Level Consumer Commission.  (      ) (c) Your friend has been sold a medicine that has crossed the expiry date and you are advising her to lodge a complaint (      ). (d) Iqbal makes it a point to scan through all the particulars given on the pack of any item that he buys. (      ) (e) You are not satisfied with the services of the cable operator catering to your locality but you are unable to switch over to anybody else.  (      ) (f) You realise that you have received a defective camera from a dealer. You are complaining to the head office persistently (      ). If the standardisation ensures the quality of a commodity, why are many goods available in the market without ISI or Agmark certification? Find out the details of who provides Hallmark and ISO certification. LET S WORK THESE OUT TAKING THE CONSUMER MOVEMENT FORWARD 1. Why are rules and regulations required in the marketplace? Illustrate with a few examples. 2. What factors gave birth to the consumer movement in India? Trace its evolution. 3. Explain the need for consumer consciousness by giving two examples. 4. Mention a few factors which cause exploitation of consumers. 5. What is the rationale behind the enactment of Consumer Protection Act 1986? 6. Describe some of your duties as consumers if you visit a shopping complex in your locality. 7. Suppose you buy a bottle of honey and a biscuit packet. Which logo or mark you will have to look for and why? 8. What legal measures were taken by the government to empower the consumers in India? 9. Mention some of the rights of consumers and write a few sentences on each. 10. By what means can the consumers express their solidarity? 11. Critically examine the progress of consumer movement in India. 12. Match the following. (i) Availing details of ingredients of a product Right to safety Dealing with consumer cases (iii) Accident due to faulty engine in a scooter Certification of edible oil and cereals (iv) District Consumer Commission Agency that develop standards for goods and services (v)   Food fortification Right to information (vi) Consumers International Global level institution of consumer welfare organisations (vii) Bureau of Indian Standards Addition of key nutrients to staple time for filing and attending the commission proceedings etc. In most purchases cash memos are not issued hence evidence is not easy to gather. Moreover most purchases in the market are small retail sales. The COPRA was amended in the year consumers in India. Buying through internet is now included. If there is any service deficiency or defective product, service provider or manufacturer is also held responsible and would be penalized or even imprisoned. Settlement of disputes with the help of a neutral intermediary outside the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, called mediator, is now encouraged at all the three tiers Consumer Commissions. After more than 30 years of the enactment of COPRA, consumer awareness in India is spreading but slowly. Besides this the enforcement of laws that protect unorganised sectors is weak. Similarly, rules and regulations for working of markets are often not Nevertheless, there is scope for consumers to realise their role and importance. It is often said that consumer movements can be effective only with the consumers  active involvement. It requires a voluntary effort and struggle involving the participation of one and all. 13. Say True or False. (i) COPRA applies only to goods. (ii) India is one of the many countries in the world which has exclusive authorities established for consumer disputes redressal. (iii) When a consumer feels that he has been exploited, he must file a case in the District Consumer Commission. (iv) It is worthwhile to move to consumer commissions only if the damages incurred are of high value. (v) Hallmark is the certification maintained for standardisation of jewellry. (vi) The consumer redressal process is very simple and quick. (vii) A consumer has the right to get compensation depending on the degree of 1. Your school organises a consumer awareness week. As the Secretary of the Consumer Awareness Forum, draft a poster covering all the consumer rights. activity can be done with the help of your English teacher. 2. Mrs. Krishna bought a colour television (CTV) against six months warranty. The CTV stopped working after three months. When she complained to the dealer / shop where it was purchased, they sent an engineer to set it right. The CTV continues to give trouble and Mrs Krishna no longer gets any reply to the complaint she made to the dealer / shop. She decides to write to the Consumer Commission in her area. Write a letter on her behalf. You may discuss with your partner / group members before you write it. 3. Establish a consumer club in your school. Organise mock consumer awareness workshops like monitoring bookshops, canteen, and shops in your school area. 4. Prepare posters with catchy slogans like: An alert consumer is a safe consumer Consumers be cautious Be aware of your rights As consumers, assert your right Arise, awake and stop not till ______________________ (Complete it) 5. Interview 4-5 persons in your neighbourhood and collect varied experiences regarding how they have been victims of such exploitation and their responses. 6. Conduct a survey in your locality by supplying the following questionnaire to get an idea as to how alert they are as consumers. ADDITIONAL PROJECTS / ACTIVITIES For each question, tick one. 1. When you buy some item, do you insist on a bill? 2. Do you keep the bill carefully? 3. If you realise that you have been tricked by the shop- keeper, have you bothered to complain to him or her? 4. Have you been able to convince him or her that you ve 5. Do you simply grumble to yourself reconciling that it is your fate that you are often being victimised so and it is 6. Do you look for ISI mark, expiry date etc.? 7. If the expiry date mentioned is just a month or so away, do you insist on a fresh packet? 8. Do you weigh the new gas cylinder/old newspapers yourself before buying/selling? 9. Do you raise an objection if a vegetable seller uses stones in place of the exact weight? 10. Do excessively bright coloured vegetables arouse your 11. Are you brand-conscious? 12. Do you associate high price with good quality (to reassure yourself that after all you have not paid a higher price just 13. Do you unhesitatingly respond to catchy offers? 14. Do you compare the price paid by you with those of 15. Do you strongly believe that your shopkeeper never cheats a regular customer like you? 16. Do you favour  home delivery  provision of items without any doubt regarding weight etc.? 17. Do you insist on  paying by meter  when you travel by (i) You are extremely aware as a consumer if your answers for Qns. 5, 12, 13, 15 and 16 are (C) and for the rest (A). (ii) If your answers are (A) for Qns. 5, 12, 13, 15 and 16 and the rest (C), then you have to wake up as consumer. (iii) If your answer is (B) for all the questions   you are somewhat Appendix 1: Body Mass Index for Adolescent Girls (Age 14-18) Less than 15.4 Less than 15.5 Less than 15.5 Less than 15.6 Less than 15.6 Less than 15.6 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.8 Less than 15.8 Less than 15.8 Less than 15.9 Less than 15.9 Less than 15.9 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 15.4 to 27.3 15.5 to 27.4 15.5 to 27.5 15.6 to 27.6 15.6 to 27.7 15.6 to 27.7 15.7 to 27.8 15.7 to 27.9 15.7 to 28.0 15.8 to 28.0 15.8 to 28.1 15.8 to 28.2 15.9 to 28.2 15.9 to 28.3 15.9 to 28.4 16.0 to 28.4 16.0 to 28.5 16.0 to 28.6 16.0 to 28.6 16.1 to 28.7 16.1 to 28.7 16.1 to 28.7 16.1 to 28.8 16.2 to 28.8 16.2 to 28.9 16.2 to 28.9 16.2 to 29.0 16.2 to 29.0 16.2 to 29.0 16.3 to 29.1 16.3 to 29.1 16.3 to 29.1 16.3 to 29.2 16.3 to 29.2 16.3 to 29.2 16.3 to 29.3 16.3 to 29.3 16.3 to 29.3 16.3 to 29.3 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 16.4 to 29.4 More than 27.3 More than 27.4 More than 27.5 More than 27.6 More than 26.3 More than 27.7 More than 27.8 More than 27.9 More than 28.0 More than 28.0 More than 28.1 More than 28.2 More than 28.2 More than 28.3 More than 28.4 More than 28.4 More than 28.5 More than 28.5 More than 28.6 More than 28.6 More than 28.7 More than 28.7 More than 28.8 More than 28.8 More than 28.9 More than 28.9 More than 29.0 More than 29.0 More than 29.0 More than 29.1 More than 29.1 More than 29.1 More than 29.2 More than 29.2 More than 29.2 More than 29.3 More than 29.3 More than 29.3 More than 29.3 More than 29.4 More than 29.4 More than 29.4 More than 29.4 More than 29.4 More than 29.5 More than 29.5 More than 29.5 More than 29.5 More than 29.5 Appendix 2: Body Mass Index for Adolescent Boys (Age 14-18) Less than 15.5 Less than 15.5 Less than 15.6 Less than 15.6 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.7 Less than 15.8 Less than 15.8 Less than 15.9 Less than 15.9 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.0 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.1 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.2 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.3 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.4 Less than 16.5 Less than 16.5 Less than 16.5 Less than 16.6 Less than 16.6 Less than 16.7 Less than 16.7 Less than 16.7 Less than 16.8 Less than 16.8 Less than 16.8 Less than 16.9 Less than 16.9 Less than 16.9 Less than 17.0 Less than 17.0 Less than 17.0 Less than 17.1 Less than 17.1 Less than 17.1 Less than 17.1 Less than 17.2 Less than 17.2 Less than 17.2 Less than 17.3 Less than 17.3 15.5 to 25.9 15.5 to 26.0 15.6 to 26.1 15.6 to 26.2 15.7 to 26.3 15.7 to 26.4 15.7 to 26.5 15.8 to 26.5 15.8 to 26.6 15.9 to 26.7 15.9 to 26.8 16.0 to 26.9 16.0 to 27.0 16.1 to 27.1 16.1 to 27.1 16.1 to 27.2 16.2 to 27.3 16.2 to 27.4 16.3 to 27.4 16.3 to 27.5 16.3 to 27.6 16.4 to 27.7 16.4 to 27.7 16.5 to 27.8 16.5 to 27.9 16.5 to 27.9 16.6 to 28.0 16.6 to 28.1 16.7 to 28.1 16.7 to 28.2 16.7 to 28.3 16.8 to 28.3 16.8 to 28.4 16.8 to 28.5 16.9 to 28.5 16.9 to 28.6 16.9 to 28.6 17.0 to 28.7 17.0 to 28.7 17.1 to 28.8 17.1 to 28.9 17.1 to 28.9 17.1 to 29.0 17.1 to 29.0 17.2 to 29.1 17.2 to 29.1 17.2 to 29.2 17.3 to 29.2 17.3 to 29.2 More than 25.9 More than 26.0 More than 26.1 More than 26.2 More than 26.3 More than 26.4 More than 26.5 More than 26.5 More than 26.6 More than 26.7 More than 26.8 More than 26.9 More than 27.0 More than 27.1 More than 27.1 More than 27.2 More than 27.3 More than 27.4 More than 27.4 More than 27.5 More than 27.6 More than 27.7 More than 27.7 More than 27.8 More than 27.9 More than 27.9 More than 28.0 More than 28.1 More than 28.1 More than 28.2 More than 28.3 More than 28.3 More than 28.4 More than 28.5 More than 28.5 More than 28.6 More than 28.6 More than 28.7 More than 28.7 More than 28.8 More than 28.9 More than 28.9 More than 29.0 More than 29.0 More than 29.1 More than 29.1 More than 29.2 More than 29.2 More than 29.2 Source: Based on chart published by the World Health Organization Abijit Vinayak Banerjee, Roland Benabou and Dilip Mookherjee (eds.), Understanding Poverty, Oxford University Press, New Y Amit Bhaduri and Deepak Nayyar, Intelligent Person s Guide to Liberalisation, Penguin Books, New Delhi, 1996. Amit Bhaduri, Development with Dignity: The Case for Full Employment, National Book Trust, New Delhi, 2005. Amit Bhaduri, Macroeconomics: The Dynamics of Commodity Production, Macmillan, London, 1986. Bimal Jalan (ed.), Indian Economy, Penguin Books, New Delhi, 2002. CUTS, Is it Really Safe, Consumer Unity Trust Society, Jaipur, 2004. CUTS, State of the Indian Consumer: Analyses of the Implementation of the United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection, 1985 in India, Consumer Unity, Jaipur, 2001. Indrani Mazumdar, Women and Globalisation: The Impact on Women Workers in the Formal and Informal Sectors in India, Stree, Delhi, 2007. Jagdish Bhagwati In Defence of Globalisation, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 2004. Jan Breman and Parthiv Shah, Working in the mill no more, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 2005. Jan Breman, Footloose Labour: Working in India s Informal Economy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996. Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen, India: Development and Participation, Oxford University Press, Delhi, Third Impression, 2007. John K.Galbraith, Money: Whence it Came, Whence it Went, Indian Book Company New Delhi, 1975. Joseph Stiglitz, Globalisation and its Discontents, Penguin Books India, New Delhi,  2003. National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Landmark Judgments on Consumer Protection, Universal Law Publishing Co., Delhi, 2005., The Economic History of India, 1857-1947, Oxford University Press, Delhi, Second Edition, 2006. Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Key Results of Employment-Unemployment Rounds, National Sample Survey Organisation, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Govt of India, New Delhi. National Human Development Report, Planning Commission, Government of India, National Family Health Survey, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi and International Institute of Population Studies, Mumbai. Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai. Human Development Report, United Nations Development Programme, New York. World Development Indicators, The World Bank, Washington.


=== Class11_Economics ===

DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND EXPERIENCE The two chapters in this unit give us an overview of the state of the Indian economy as it was at the eve of independence till after four decades of planned development, which was a path that India chose. This meant that the Government of India had to take a series of steps such as the establishment of the Planning Commission and announcement of five year plans. An overview of the goals of five year plans and a critical appraisal of the merits and limitations of planned development has been covered in this unit. After studying this chapter, the learners will become familiar with the state of the Indian economy in 1947, the year of India s Independence understand the factors that led to the underdevelopment and stagnation of the Indian economy. EVE OF INDEPENDENCE INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT The primary objective of this book, Indian Economic Development, is to familiarise you with the basic features of the Indian economy, and its development, as it is today, in the aftermath of Independence. However, it is equally important to know something about the country s economic past even as you learn about its present state and future prospects. So, let us first look at the state of India s economy prior to the country s independence and form an idea of the various considerations that shaped India s  post-independence The structure of India s present- day economy is not just of current making; it has its roots steeped in history, particularly in the period when India was under British rule which lasted for almost two centuries before India finally won its independence on 15 August 1947. The sole purpose of the British colonial rule in India was to reduce the country to being a raw material supplier for Great Britain s own rapidly expanding modern industrial base. An understanding of the exploitative nature of this relationship is essential for any assessment of the kind and level of development which the Indian economy has been able to attain over the last seven and half decades. 1.2 LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE India had an independent economy before the advent of the British rule. Though agriculture was the main source of livelihood for most people, yet, the country s economy was characterised by various kinds of manufacturing activities. India was particularly well known for its handicraft industries in the fields of cotton and silk textiles, metal and precious stone works etc. These products enjoyed a worldwide market based on the reputation of the fine quality of material used and the high standards of craftsmanship seen in all imports from India (See Box 1.1).  India is the pivot of our Empire... If the Empire loses any other part of its Dominion we can survive, but if we lose India, the sun of our Empire will have Victor Alexander Vruce, the Viceroy of British India in 1894 Box 1.1: Textile Industry in Bengal Muslin is a type of cotton textile which had its origin in Bengal, particularly, places in and around Dhaka (spelled during the pre-independence period as Dacca),  now the capital city of Bangladesh.  Daccai Muslin  had gained worldwide fame as an exquisite type of  cotton textile. The finest variety of muslin was called malmal. Sometimes, foreign travellers also used to refer to it as malmal shahi or malmal khas implying that it was worn by, or fit for, the royalty. INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE The economic policies pursued by the colonial government in India were concerned more with the protection and promotion of the economic interests of their home country than with the development of the Indian economy. Such policies brought about a fundamental change in the structure of the Indian economy   transforming the country into supplier of raw materials and consumer of finished industrial products from Britain. Obviously, the colonial govern- ment never made any sincere attempt to estimate India s national and per capita income. Some individual attempts which were made to measure such incomes yielded conflicting and inconsistent results. Among the notable estimators   Dadabhai Naoroji, William Digby, Findlay Shirras, V.K.R.V. Rao and R.C. Desai   it was Rao, whose estimates during the colonial period was considered very significant. However, most studies did find that the country s growth of aggregate real output during the first half of the twentieth century was less than two per cent coupled with a meagre half per cent growth in per capita output 1.3 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR India s economy under the British colonial rule remained fundamentally agrarian   about 85 per cent of the country s population lived mostly in villages and derived livelihood directly or indirectly from agriculture (See Box 1.2). However, despite being the occupation of such a large population, the agricultural Fig. 1.1 India s agricultural stagnation under the British colonial rule Box 1.2: Agriculture During The French traveller, Bernier, described seventeenth century Bengal in the following way:  The knowledge I have acquired of Bengal in two visits inclines me to believe that it is richer than Egypt. It exports, in abundance, cottons and silks, rice, sugar and butter. It produces amply   for its own consumption   wheat, vegetables, grains, fowls, ducks and geese. It has immense herds of pigs and flocks of sheep and goats. Fish of every kind it has in profusion. From rajmahal to the sea is an endless number of canals, cut in bygone ages from the Ganges by immense labour for navigation and irrigation.    Take note of the agricultural prosperity in our country in the seventeenth century. Contrast it with agricultural stagnation around the time when the British left India, around 200 years later. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT sector continued to experience stagnation and, not infrequently, unusual deterioration. Agricultural productivity became low though, in absolute terms, the sector experienced some growth due to the expansion of the aggregate area under cultivation. This stagnation in the agricultural sector was caused mainly because of the various systems of land settlement that were introduced by the colonial government.  Particularly, under the zamindari system which was implemented in the then Bengal Presidency comprising parts of India s present-day eastern states, the profit accruing out of the agriculture sector went to the zamindars instead of the cultivators. However, a considerable number of zamindars, and not just the colonial government, did nothing to improve the condition of agriculture. The main interest of the zamindars was only to collect rent regardless of the economic condition of the cultivators; this caused immense misery and social tension among the latter. To a very great extent, the terms of the revenue settlement were also responsible for the zamindars adopting such an attitude; dates for depositing specified sums of revenue were fixed, failing which the zamindars were to lose their rights. Besides this, low levels of technology, lack of irrigation facilities and negligible use of fertilisers, all added up to aggravate the plight of the farmers and contributed to the productivity. There was, of course, some evidence of a relatively higher yield of cash crops in certain areas of the country due to commercialisation of agriculture. Work These Out Compare the map of British India with that of independent India and find out the areas that became parts of Pakistan. Why were those parts so important to India from the economic point of view? (Refer, to your advantage, Dr Rajendra Prasad s book, India Divided). What were the various forms of revenue settlement adopted by the British in India? Where did they implement them and to what effect? How far do you think those settlements have a bearing on the current agricultural scenario in India? (In your attempt to find answers to these questions, you may refer to Ramesh Chandra Dutt s Economic History of India, which comes in three volumes, and B.H. Baden-Powell s The Land Systems of British India, also in two volumes. For better comprehension of the subject, you can also try and develop an illustrated agrarian map of British India either by hand or with the help of your school computer. Remember, nothing helps better than an illustrated map to understand the subject at hand). INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE But this could hardly help farmers in improving their economic condition as, instead of producing food crops, now they were producing cash crops which were to be ultimately used by British industries back home. Despite some progress made in irrigation, India s agriculture was starved of investment in terracing, flood-control, drainage and desalinisation of soil. While a small section of farmers changed their cropping pattern from food crops to commercial crops, a large section of tenants, small farmers and sharecroppers neither had resources and technology nor had incentive to invest in agriculure. 1.4 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR As in the case of agriculture, so also in manufacturing, India could not develop a sound industrial base under the colonial rule. Even as the country s world famous handicraft industries declined, no corresponding modern industrial base was allowed to come up to take pride of place so long enjoyed by the former. The primary motive of the colonial government behind this policy of systematically de- industrialising India was two-fold. The intention was, first, to reduce India to the status of a mere exporter of important raw materials for the upcoming modern industries in Britain and, second, to turn India into a sprawling market for the finished products of those industries so that their continued expansion could be ensured to the maximum advantage of their home country   Britain. In the unfolding economic scenario, the decline of the indigenous handicraft industries created not only massive unemployment in India but also a new demand in the Indian consumer market, which was now deprived of the supply of locally made goods. This demand was profitably met by the manufactured goods from Britain. During the second half of the nineteenth century, modern industry began to take root in India but its progress remained very slow. Initially, this development was confined to the setting up of cotton and jute textile mills. The cotton textile mills, mainly dominated by Indians, were located in the western parts of the country, namely, Maharashtra and Gujarat, while the jute mills dominated by  the foreigners were mainly concentrated in Bengal. Subsequently, the iron and steel industries began coming up in the beginning of the twentieth century. The Tata Iron and Steel Company (TISCO) was incorporated in 1907. A few other industries in the fields of sugar, cement, paper etc. came up after the Second World War. However, there was hardly any capital goods industry to help promote further industrialisation in India. Capital goods industry means industries which can produce machine tools which are, in turn, used for producing articles for current consumption. The establishment of a few manufacturing units here and INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT there was no substitute to the near wholesale displacement of the country s traditional handicraft industries. Furthermore, the growth rate of the new industrial sector and its contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)  or Gross Value Added remained very small. Another significant drawback of the new industrial sector was the very limited area of operation of the public sector. This sector remained confined only to the railways, power generation, communications, ports and some other departmental undertakings. 1.5 FOREIGN TRADE India has been an important trading nation since ancient times. But the restrictive policies of commodity production, trade and tariff pursued by the colonial government adversely affected the structure, composition and volume of India s foreign trade. Consequently, India became an exporter of primary products such as raw silk, cotton, wool, sugar, indigo, jute etc. and an importer of finished consumer goods like cotton, silk and woollen clothes and capital goods like light machinery produced in the factories of Britain. For all practical purposes, Britain maintained a monopoly control over India s exports and imports.  As a result, more than half of India s foreign trade was restricted to Britain while the rest was allowed with a few other countries like China, Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and Persia (Iran). The opening of the Suez Canal further intensified British control over India s foreign trade (see Box 1.3). The most important characteristic of India s foreign trade throughout the colonial period was the generation of a large export surplus. But this surplus came at a huge cost to the country s economy. Several essential commodities food grains, clothes, Work These Out   Prepare a list showing where and when other modern industries of India were first set up. Can you also find out what the basic requirements are for setting up any modern industry? What, for example, might have been the reasons for the setting up of the Tata Iron and Steel Company at Jamshedpur, which is now in the state of Jharkhand?   How many iron and steel factories are there in India at present? Are these iron and steel factories among the best in the world or do you think that these factories need restructuring and upgradation? If yes, how can this be done? There is an argument that industries which are not strategic in nature should not continue to be in the public sector. What is your view?   On a map of India, mark the cotton textiles, jute mills and textile mills that existed at the time of independence. INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE kerosene etc.   were scarcely available in the domestic market. Furthermore, this export surplus did not result in any flow of gold or silver into India. Rather, this was used to make payments for the expenses incurred by an office set up by the colonial government in Britain, expenses on war, again fought by the British government, and the import of invisible items, all of which led to the drain of 1.6 DEMOGRAPHIC CONDITION Various details about the population of British India were first collected through a census in 1881. Though suffering from certain limitations, it revealed the unevenness in India s population growth. Subsequently, Fig.1.2 Suez Canal: Used as highway between India and Britain Box 1.3: Trade Through the Suez Suez Canal is an artificial waterway running from north to south across the Isthmus of Suez in north-eastern Egypt. It connects Port Said on the Mediterranean Sea with the Gulf of Suez, an arm of the Red Sea. The canal provides a direct trade route for ships American ports and ports located in South Asia, East Africa and Oceania by doing away with the need to sail around Africa. Strategically and economically, it is one of the most important waterways in the world. Its opening in 1869 reduced the cost of transportation and made access to the Indian market Not to scale Work These Out   Prepare a list of items that were exported from and imported into India during the British rule.   Collect information from the Economic Survey for various years published by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, on various items of export from India and its imports. Compare these with imports and exports from the  pre-independence era. Also find out the names of prominent ports which now handle the bulk of India s foreign trade. Not to scale INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT every ten years such census operations were carried out. Before 1921, India was in the first stage of demographic transition. The second stage of transition began after 1921. However, neither the total population of India nor the rate of population growth at this stage was very high. The various social development indicators were also not quite encouraging. The overall literacy level was less than 16 per cent. Out of this, the female literacy level was at a negligible low of about seven per cent.  Public health facilities were either unavailable to large chunks of population or, when available, were highly inadequate. Consequently, water and air -borne diseases  were rampant and took a huge toll on life.  No wonder, the overall mortality rate was very high and in that,, the infant mortality rate was quite alarming about 218 per thousand in contrast to the present infant mortality rate of 28 per thousand. Life expectancy was also very low 32 years in contrast to the present 69 years. In the absence of reliable data, it is difficult to specify the extent of poverty at that time but there is no doubt that extensive poverty prevailed in India during the colonial period which contributed to the worsening profile of India s population of the time. 1.7 OCCUPATIONAL STRUCTURE During the colonial period, the occupational structure of India, i.e., distribution of working persons across different industries and sectors, showed little sign of change. The agricultural sector accounted for Fig. 1.3 A large section of India s population did not have basic needs such as housing INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE the largest share of workforce, which usually remained at a high of 70-75 per cent while the manufacturing and the services sectors accounted for only 10 and 15-20 per cent respectively. Another striking aspect was the growing regional variation. Parts of the then Madras Presidency (comprising areas of the present-day states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka), Bombay and Bengal witnessed a decline in the dependence of the workforce on the agricultural sector with a commensurate increase in the manufacturing and the services sectors. However, there had been an increase in the share of workforce in agriculture during the same time in states such as Orissa, Rajasthan and Under the colonial regime, basic infrastructure such as railways, ports, water transport, posts and telegraphs did develop. However, the real motive behind this development was not to provide basic amenities to the people but to subserve various colonial interests. Roads constructed in India prior to the advent of the British rule were not fit for modern transport. The roads that were built primarily served the purposes  of mobilising the army within India and drawing out raw materials from the countryside to the nearest railway station or the port to send these to far away England or other lucrative foreign destinations. There always remained an acute shortage of all- weather roads to reach out to the rural areas during the rainy season. Naturally, therefore, people mostly living in these areas suffered grievously during natural calamities The British introduced the railways in India in 1850 and it is considered as one of their most railways affected the structure of the Indian economy in two important ways. On the one hand it enabled people to undertake long distance geographical and cultural barriers while, on the other hand, it fostered agriculture which adversely affected the self-sufficiency of the village economies in India. The volume of expanded but its benefits rarely accrued to the Indian people. The social benefits, which the Work These Out   Can you find out the reasons behind frequent occurrence of famines in India before independence? You may read from Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen s book, Poverty and Famines.  Prepare a pie chart for the occupational structure in India at the time of INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Indian people gained owing to the introduction of the railways, were thus outweighed by the country s huge economic loss. Along with the development of roads and railways, the colonial dispensation also took measures for developing the inland trade and sea lanes. However, these measures were far from satisfactory. The inland waterways, at times, also proved uneconomical as in the case of the Coast Canal on the Orissa coast. Though the canal was built at a huge cost to the government exchequer, yet, it failed to compete with the railways, which soon traversed the region running parallel to the canal, and had to be ultimately abandoned. The introduction of the expensive system of electric telegraph in India, similarly, served the purpose of maintaining law and order. The postal services, on the other hand, despite serving a useful public purpose, remained all through Fig.1.5 Tata Airlines, a division of Tata and Sons, was established in 1932 inaugurating the aviation sector in India Fig. 1.4 First Railway Bridge linking  Bombay with Thane, 1854 Work This Out   There is a perception still going around that in many ways  the  British administration in India was quite beneficial. This informed debate. How would you look at this perception? Argue this out in your class    Was the British Raj good for INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE By the time India won its independence, the impact of the two-century long British colonial rule was already showing on all aspects of the Indian economy. The agricultural sector was already saddled with surplus labour and extremely low productivity. The industrial sector was crying for modernisation, diversification, capacity building and increased public investment. Foreign trade was oriented to feed the Industrial Revolution in Britain. Infrastructure facilities, including the famed railway network, needed upgradation, expansion and public orientation. Prevalence of rampant poverty and unemployment required welfare orientation of public economic policy. In a nutshell, the social and economic challenges before the country were enormous.   An understanding of the economy before independence is necessary to know and appreciate the level of development achieved during the post-   Under the colonial dispensation, the economic policies of the government were concerned more with the protection and promotion of  British economic interests than with the need to develop the economic condition of the colonised country and its people.   The agricultural sector continued to experience stagnation and deterioration despite the fact that the largest section of Indian population depended on it for sustenance.   The rule of the British-India government led to the collapse of India s world famous handicraft industries without contributing, in any significant manner, to its replacement by a modern industrial base.   Lack of adequate public health facilities, occurrence of frequent natural calamities and famines pauperised the hapless Indian people and resulted in engendering high mortality rates.   Some efforts were made by the colonial regime to improve infrastructure facilities but these efforts were spiced with selfish motives. However, the independent Indian government had to built on this base through INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT What was the focus of the economic policies pursued by the colonial government in India? What were the impacts of these policies? Name some notable economists who estimated India s per capita income during the colonial period. What were the main causes of India s agricultural stagnation during the colonial period? Name some modern industries which were in operation in our country at the time of independence. What was the two-fold motive behind the systematic de- industrialisation effected by the British in pre-independent India? The traditional handicrafts industries were ruined under the British rule. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your What objectives did the British intend to achieve through their policies of infrastructure development in India? Critically appraise some of the shortfalls of the industrial policy pursued by the British colonial administration. What do you understand by the drain of Indian wealth during the Which is regarded as the defining year to mark the demographic transition from its first to the second decisive stage? Give a quantitative appraisal of India s demographic profile during the colonial period. Highlight the salient features of India s pre-independence occupational Underscore some of India s most crucial economic challenges at the time of independence. When was India s first official census operation undertaken? Indicate the volume and direction of trade at the time of Were there any positive contributions made by the British in India? INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES Prepare a list of goods and services that were available to people in pre-independence India in rural and urban areas. Compare it with the consumption pattern of such goods and services by the people today. Highlight the perceptible difference in the people s standard Find pictures of towns/villages, in your vicinity, of the pre- independence period and compare these with their present scenario. What changes can you mark? Are such changes for better or for Rally around your teacher and organise a group discussion on  Has the zamindari system really been abolished in India ?  If the consensus is negative, then what measures would you think should be taken to banish it and why? Identify the major occupations followed by the people of our country at the time of independence. What major occupations do the people follow today? In the light of reform policies, how would you visualise the occupational scenario in India 15 years from now say, 2035? BADEN-POWELL, B.H. 1892. The Land Systems of British India, Vols I, II and III. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford. BUCHANAN, D.H. 1966. Development of Capitalist Enterprise in India. Frank Cass and Co, London. CHANDRA, BIPAN. 1993.   The Colonial Legacy  in Bimal Jalan (Ed.), The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin Books, New Delhi. DUTT, R.C. 1963. Economic History of India, Vols I and II. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, New Delhi. KUMAR, D. AND MEGHNAD DESAI (Eds.). 1983. Cambridge Economic History of India. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. MILL, JAMES.1972. History of British India. Associated Publishing House, PRASAD, RAJENDRA. 1946. India Divided. Hind Kitabs, Bombay. SEN, AMARTYA. 1999. Poverty and Famines. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. Economic Survey (for various years). Ministry of Finance, Government of India. After studying this chapter, the learners will come to know the goals of India s five year plans know about the development policies in different sectors such as agriculture and industry from 1950-1990 learn to think about the merits and limitations of a regulated economy. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 On 15 August 1947, India woke to a new dawn of freedom. Finally we were masters of our own destiny after some two hundred years of British rule; the job of nation building was now in our own hands.  The leaders of independent India had to decide, among other things, the type of economic system most suitable for our nation, a system which would promote the welfare of all rather than a few.  There are different types of economic systems (see Box 2.1) and among them, socialism appealed to Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However, he was not in favour of the kind of socialism established in the former Soviet Union where all the means of production, i.e. all the factories and farms in the country, were owned by the government. There was no private property. It is not possible in a democracy like India for the government to change the ownership pattern of land and other properties of its citizens in the way that it was done in the former Soviet Union. Nehru, and many other leaders and thinkers of the newly independent India, sought an alternative to the extreme versions of capitalism and socialism. Basically sympathising with the socialist outlook, they found the answer in an economic system which, in their view, combined the best features of socialism without its drawbacks. In this view, India would be a socialist society with a strong public sector but also with private property and democracy; the government would plan (see Box 2.2) for the The central objective of Planning in India... is to initiate a process of development which will raise the living standards and open out to the people new opportunities for a richer and more varied life. First Five Year Plan Work These Out   Prepare a chart on the different types of economic systems prevalent in the world. List out the countries as capitalist, socialist and   Plan a class trip to an agriculture farm. Divide the class into seven groups with each group to plan a specific goal, for example, the purpose of the visit, money expenditure involved, time taken, resources, people accompanying the group and who need to be contacted, possible places of visit, possible questions to be asked etc. Now, with the help of your teacher, compile these specific goals and compare with long-term goals of successful visit to an agricultural farm. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Box 2.1: Types of Economic Systems Every society has to answer three questions  What goods and services should be produced in the country?  How should the goods and services be produced? Should producers use more human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?  How should the goods and services be distributed among people? One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces of supply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only those consumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that can be sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If cars are in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycles will be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensive methods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist society the goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what people need but on the basis of Purchasing Power the ability to buy goods and services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Low cost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power to back the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced and supplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to Jawaharlal Nehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of people of the country would be left behind without the chance to improve their quality of life. A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care to all its citizens.  Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since everything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most of the economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles. Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and the market together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, the market will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, and the government will provide essential goods and services which the market fails to do. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 economy with the private sector being encouraged to be part of the plan effort. The  Industrial Policy Resolution  of 1948 and the Directive Principles of the Indian Constitution reflected this outlook.  In 1950, the Planning Commission was set up with the Prime Minister as its Chairperson. The era of five year plans had begun. 2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS A plan should have some clearly specified goals.  The goals of the five year plans were: growth, modernisation, self-reliance and equity. This does not mean that all the plans have given equal importance to all these goals. Due to limited resources, a choice has to be made in each plan about which of the goals is to be given primary importance. Nevertheless, the planners have to ensure that, as far as possible, the policies of the plans do not contradict these four goals. Let us now learn about the goals of planning in Growth: It refers to increase in the country s capacity to produce the output of goods and services within the country. It implies either a larger stock of productive capital, or a larger size of supporting services like transport and banking, or an increase in the efficiency of productive capital and services. A good indicator of economic growth, in the language of Box 2.2: What is a Plan? A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. It should have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are to be achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans were of five years duration and were called five year plans (we borrowed this from the former Soviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents upto the year 2017 not only specify the objectives to be attained in the five years of a plan but also what is to be achieved over a period of twenty years. This long-term plan is called  perspective plan. The five year plans were supposed to provide the basis for the perspective plan. It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equal importance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict with the goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need for labour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed. We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India. India s five year plans did not spell out how much of each and every good and service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary (the former Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan is specific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance, power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Box 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian Planning Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of India s five year plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, stands out. Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year Plan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding goals of Indian planning; this plan was based on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, he can be regarded as the architect of Indian Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta. He was educated at the Presidency College in Calcutta and at Cambridge University in England. His contributions to the subject of statistics brought him international fame. In 1945 he was made a Fellow (member) of Britain s Royal Society, one of the most prestigious organisations of scientists; only the most outstanding scientists are made members of this Society. Mahalanobis established the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and started a journal, Sankhya, which still serves as a respected forum for statisticians  to discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded by statisticians and economists all over the world to this day. During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited many distinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India s economic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winners later, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Among the economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical of the socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing to listen to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar. Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated by Mahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role in putting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue to profit from his contribution to statistical theory. Source: Sukhamoy Chakravarty,  Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra  in John Eatwell et.al, (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary: Economic Development, W.W. Norton, New York and London. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 economics, is steady increase in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The GDP is the market value of all the final goods and services produced in the country during a year. You have studied this concept in Class X as well. You can think of the GDP as a cake and growth is increase in the size of the cake. If the cake is larger, more people can enjoy it. It is necessary to produce more goods and services if the people of India are to enjoy (in the words of the First Five Year Plan) a more rich and varied life. The GDP of a country is derived from the different sectors of the economy, namely the agricultural sector, the industrial sector and the service sector. The contribution made by each of these sectors makes up the structural composition of the economy.  In some countries, growth in agriculture contributes more to the GDP growth, while in some countries the growth in the service sector contributes more to GDP growth (see Box 2.4). Modernisation: To increase the production of goods and services the producers have to adopt new technology. For example, a farmer can increase the output on the farm by using new seed varieties instead of using the old ones. Similarly, a factory can increase output by using a new type of machine. Adoption of new technology is called modernisation. However, modernisation does not refer only to the use of new technology but also to changes in social outlook such as the recognition that women should have the same rights as men.  In a traditional society, women are supposed to remain at home while men work. A modern society makes use of the talents of women in the work place   in banks, factories, schools etc.   and such a society in most occassions is also prosperous. Self-reliance: A nation can promote economic growth and modernisation by using its own resources or by using resources imported from other nations. The first seven five year plans gave importance to self-reliance which means avoiding imports of those goods which could be Box 2.4: The Service Sector As a country develops, it undergoes  structural change. In the case of India, the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share of agriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than the other two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than 50 per cent as we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share of the service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry, like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share of the service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked the onset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in chapter 3). INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT produced in India itself. This policy was considered a necessity in order to reduce our dependence on foreign countries, especially for food. It is understandable that people who were recently freed from foreign domination should give importance to self- reliance. Further, it was feared that dependence on imported food supplies, foreign technology and foreign capital may make India s sovereignty vulnerable to foreign interference in our policies. Equity: Now growth, modernisation and self-reliance, by themselves, may not improve the kind of life which people are living. A country can have high growth, the most modern technology developed in the country itself, and also have most of its people living in poverty. It is important to ensure that the benefits of economic prosperity reach the poor sections as well instead of being enjoyed only by the rich. So, in addition to growth, modernisation and self-reliance, equity is also important. Every Indian should be able to meet his or her basic needs such as food, a decent house, education and health care and inequality in the distribution of wealth should be reduced. Let us now see how the first seven five year plans, covering the period 1950-1990, attempted to attain these four goals and the extent to which they succeeded in doing so, with reference to agriculture, industry and trade. You will study the policies and developmental issues taken up after 1991 in Chapter 3. You have learnt in Chapter 1 that during the colonial rule there was neither growth nor equity in the agricultural sector. The policy makers of independent India had to address these issues which they did through land reforms and promoting the use of  High Yielding Variety  (HYV) seeds which ushered in a revolution in Land Reforms: At the time of independence, the land tenure system was characterised by intermediaries Work These Out   Discuss in your class the changes in technology used for (a)  Production of food grains (b)  Packaging of products (c)  Mass communication   Find out and prepare a list of major items that India imported and exported during 1990-91 and 2018-19. (For this, see P. 145 also). (a) Observe the difference (b) Do you see the impact of self-reliance? Discuss. For getting these details you may refer to Economic Survey of the latest year. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 (variously called zamindars, jagirdars etc.) who merely collected rent from the actual tillers of the soil without contributing towards  improvements on the farm.  The low productivity of the agricultural sector forced India to import food from the United States of America (U.S.A.). Equity in agriculture called for land reforms which primarily refer to change in the ownership of landholdings. Just a year after independence, steps were taken to abolish intermediaries and to make the tillers the owners of land. The idea behind this move was that ownership of land would give incentives (see Box 2.5) to the tillers to invest in making improvements provided sufficient capital was made available to them. Land ceiling was another policy to promote equity in the agricultural sector. This means fixing the maximum size of land which could be owned by an individual. The purpose of land ceiling was to reduce the concentration of land ownership in a few hands. The abolition of intermediaries meant that some 200 lakh tenants came into direct contact with the government   they were thus freed from being exploited by the zamindars. The ownership conferred on tenants gave them the incentive to increase output and this contributed to growth in agriculture. However, the goal of equity was not fully served by abolition of intermediaries. In some areas the former zamindars Box 2.5: Ownership and Incentives The policy of  land to the tiller  is based on the idea that the cultivators will take more interest   they will have more incentive   in increasing output if they are the owners of the land. This is because ownership of land enables the tiller to make profit from the increased output. Tenants do not have the incentive to make improvements on land since it is the landowner who would benefit more from higher output. The importance of ownership in providing incentives is well illustrated by the carelessness with which farmers in the former Soviet Union used to pack fruits for sale. It was not uncommon to see farmers packing rotten fruits along with fresh fruits in the same box. Now, every farmer knows that the rotten fruits will spoil the fresh fruits if they are packed together. This will be a loss to the farmer since the fruits cannot be sold. So why did the Soviet farmers do something which would so obviously result in loss for them? The answer lies in the incentives facing the farmers. Since farmers in the former Soviet Union did not own any land, they neither enjoyed the profits nor suffered the losses. In the absence of ownership, there was no incentive on the part of farmers to be efficient, which also explains the poor performance of the agricultural sector in the Soviet Union despite availability of vast areas of highly fertile land. Source: Thomas Sowell, Basic Economics: A Citizen s Guide to the Economy, New York: Basic Books, 2004, Second Edition. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT continued to own large areas of land by making use of some loopholes in the legislation; there were cases where tenants were evicted and the landowners claimed to be self- cultivators (the actual tillers), claiming ownership of the land; and even when the tillers got ownership of land, the poorest of the agricultural labourers (such as sharecroppers and landless labourers) did not benefit from land The land ceiling legislation also faced hurdles. The big landlords challenged the legislation in the courts, delaying its implementation. They used this delay to register their lands in the name of close relatives, legislation. The legislation also had a lot of loopholes which were exploited by the big landholders to retain their land. Land reforms were successful in Kerala and West Bengal because these states had governments committed to the policy of land to the tiller. Unfortunately other states did not have the same level of commitment and vast inequality in landholding continues to this day. independence, about 75 per cent of the country s population was Productivity in the agricultural sector was very low because of the use of old technology and the absence of required infrastructure for the vast agriculture vitally depends on the monsoon and if the monsoon fell short the farmers were in trouble unless they had access to irrigation facilities which very few had. The stagnation in agriculture during the colonial rule was permanently broken by the green revolution. This refers to the large increase in production of food grains resulting from the use of high yielding variety (HYV) seeds especially for wheat and rice.  The use of these seeds required the use of fertiliser and pesticide in the correct quantities as well as regular supply of water; the application of these inputs in correct proportions is vital. The farmers who could benefit from HYV seeds required reliable irrigation facilities as well as the financial resources to purchase fertiliser and pesticide. As a result, in the first phase of the green revolution (approximately mid 1960s upto mid 1970s), the use of HYV seeds was restricted to the more affluent states such as Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Further, the use of HYV seeds primarily benefited  the wheat- growing regions only.  In the second phase of the green revolution (mid-1970s to mid-1980s), the HYV technology spread to a larger number of states and benefited more variety of crops. The spread of green revolution technology enabled India to achieve self-sufficiency in food grains; India no longer had to be at the mercy of America, or any other nation, for meeting its food Growth in agricultural output is important but it is not enough. If a large proportion of this increase is INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 consumed by the farmers themselves instead of being sold in the market, the higher output will not make much of a difference to the economy as a whole. If, on the other hand, a substantial amount of agricultural produce is sold in the market by the farmers, the higher output can make a difference to the economy. The portion of agricultural produce which is sold in the market by the farmers is called marketed surplus.  A good proportion of the  rice and wheat produced during  the green revolution period  (available as marketed surplus) was sold by the farmers in the market. As a result, the price of food grains declined relative to other items of consumption. The low- income groups, who spend a large percentage of their income on food, benefited from this decline in relative prices. The green revolution enabled the government to procure sufficient amount of food grains to build a stock which could be used in times of food While the nation had immensely benefited from the green revolution, the technology involved was not free from risks. One such risk was the possibility that it  would increase the disparities between small and big farmers since only the big farmers could afford the required inputs, thereby reaping most of the benefits of the green revolution. Moreover, the HYV crops were also more prone to attack by pests and the small farmers who adopted this technology could lose everything in a pest attack. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Fortunately, these fears did not come true because of the steps taken by the government. The government provided loans at a low interest rate to small farmers and subsidised fertilisers so that small farmers could also have access to the needed inputs. Since the small farmers could obtain the required inputs, the output on small farms equalled the output on large farms in the  course of time. As a result, the green revolution benefited the small as well as rich farmers.  The risk of the small farmers being ruined when pests attack their crops was considerably reduced by the services rendered by research institutes established by the government. You should note that the green revolution would have favoured the rich farmers only if the state did not play an extensive role in ensuring that the small farmer also gains from the new technology. The Debate Over Subsidies: The economic justification of subsidies in agriculture is, at present, a hotly debated question. It is generally agreed that it was necessary to use subsidies to provide an incentive for adoption of the new HYV technology by farmers in general and small farmers in particular. Any new technology will be looked upon as being risky by farmers. Subsidies were, therefore, needed to encourage farmers to test the new technology. Some economists believe that once the technology is found profitable and is widely adopted, subsidies should be phased out since their purpose has been served. Further, subsidies are meant to benefit the farmers but a substantial amount of fertiliser subsidy also benefits the fertiliser industry; and among farmers, the subsidy largely benefits the farmers in the more prosperous regions. Therefore, it is argued that there is no case for continuing with fertiliser subsidies; it does not benefit the target group and it is a huge burden on the government s finances (see also Box 2.6). On the other hand, some believe that the government should continue with agricultural subsidies because farming in India continues to be a risky business. Most farmers are very poor and they will not be able to afford the required inputs without subsidies. Eliminating subsidies will increase the inequality between rich and poor farmers and violate the goal of equity. These experts argue that if subsidies are largely benefiting the fertiliser industry and big farmers, the correct policy is not to abolish subsidies but to take steps to ensure that only the poor farmers enjoy the benefits. Thus, by the late 1960s, Indian agricultural productivity had increased sufficiently to enable the country to be self-sufficient in food grains.  This is an achievement to be proud of. On the negative side, some 65 per cent of the country s population continued to be employed in agriculture even as late as 1990. Economists have found that as INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 a nation becomes more prosperous, the proportion of GDP contributed by agriculture as well as the proportion of population working in the sector declines considerably. In India, between 1950 and 1990, the proportion of GDP contributed by agriculture declined significantly but not the population depending on it (67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent by 1990). Why was such a large proportion of the population engaged in agriculture although agricultural output could have grown with much less people working in the sector? The answer is that the industrial sector and the service sector did not absorb the people working in the agricultural sector. Many economists call this an important failure of our policies followed during 1950-1990. 2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADE Economists have found that poor nations can progress only if they have a good industrial sector. Industry provides employment which is more stable than the employment in agriculture; it promotes modernisation and overall prosperity. It is for this reason that the five year plans placed a lot of emphasis on industrial development. You might have studied in the previous chapter that, at the time of independence, the variety of industries was very narrow Box 2.6: Prices as Signals You would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods are determined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signals about the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise and those who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisions about its use based on the price.  If the price of water goes up because of lower supply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example, they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain whenever the price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that less petrol is available this provides an incentive to use less petrol or look for Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidised rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity. Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity, farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources. Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT   largely confined to cotton textiles and jute. There were two well- managed iron and steel firms   one in Jamshedpur and the other in Kolkata   but, obviously, we needed to expand the industrial base with a variety of industries if the economy was to grow. Public and Private Sectors in Indian Industrial Development: The big question facing the policy makers was    what should be the role of the government and the private sector in industrial development? At the time of independence, Indian industrialists did not have the capital to undertake Work These Out   A group of students may visit an agricultural farm, prepare a case study on the method of farming used, that is, types of seeds, fertilisers, machines, means of irrigation, cost involved, marketable surplus and income earned. It will be beneficial if the changes in cultivation methods could be collected from an elderly member of the farming family (a) Discuss the findings in your class. (b) The different groups can then prepare a chart showing variations in cost of production, productivity, use of seeds, fertilisers, means of irrigation, time taken, marketable surplus and income of the family.   Collect newspaper cuttings related to the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, World Trade Organisation  (and meets of G7, G8, G10 countries). Discuss the views shared by the developed and developing countries on farm subsidies.   Prepare pie charts on the occupational structure of the Indian economy available in the following table. Discuss the possible reasons for the change in the shape of pies.   Study the arguments for and against agricultural subsidies. What is your view on this issue?   Some economists argue that farmers in other countries, particularly developed countries, are provided with high amount of subsidies and are encouraged to export their produce to other countries. Do you think our farmers will be able to compete with farmers from developed countries? INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 investment in industrial ventures required for the development of Indian economy; nor was the market big enough to encourage industrialists to undertake major projects even if they had the capital to do so. It is principally for these reasons that the erstwhile governments had to play an extensive role in promoting the industrial sector. In addition, the decision to develop the Indian economy on socialist lines led to the policy of the government controlling the commanding heights of the economy, as the Second Five  Year plan put it. This meant that the government would have complete control of those industries that were vital for the economy. The policies of the private sector would have to be complimentary to those of the public sector, with the public sector leading Industrial Policy Resolution 1956 (IPR 1956): In accordance with the goal of the state controlling the commanding heights of the economy, the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 was adopted. This resolution formed the basis of the Second Five Year Plan, the plan which tried to build the basis for a socialist pattern of society. This resolution classified industries into three categories. The first category comprised industries which would be exclusively owned by the government; the second category consisted of industries in which the private sector could supplement the efforts of the public sector, with the responsibility for starting new units; the third category consisted of the remaining industries which were to be in the private sector. Although there was a category of industries left to the private sector, the sector was kept under state control through a system of licenses. No new industry was allowed unless a license was obtained from the government. This policy was used for promoting industry in backward regions; it was easier to obtain a license if the industrial unit was established in an economically backward area. In addition, such units were given certain concessions such as tax benefits and electricity at a lower tariff. The purpose of this policy was to promote regional Even an existing industry had to obtain a license for expanding output or for diversifying production (producing a new variety of goods). This was meant  to ensure that the quantity of goods produced was not more than what the economy required. License to expand production was given only if the government was convinced that the economy required a larger quantity Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, the Village and Small-Scale Industries Committee, also called the Karve Committee, noted the possibility of using small-scale industries for promoting rural development. A  small-scale industry  is defined with reference to the  maximum invest- ment allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit has changed over a period of time. In 1950 a small-scale industrial unit was one which invested INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT a maximum of rupees five lakh; at present the maximum investment allowed is rupees one crore. It is believed that small-scale industries are more  labour intensive  i.e., they use more labour than the large-scale industries and, therefore, generate more employment. But these industries cannot compete with the big industrial firms; it is obvious that development of small-scale industry requires them to be shielded from the large firms. For this purpose, the production of a number of products was reserved for the small-scale industry; the criterion of reservation being the ability of these units to manufacture the goods. They were also given concessions such as lower excise duty and bank loans at lower interest 2.5 TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION The industrial policy that India adopted was closely related to the In the first seven plans, trade was characterised by what is commonly called an inward looking trade strategy. Technically, this strategy is called import substi- tution. This policy aimed at replacing or substituting imports with domestic production. For example, instead of importing vehicles made in a foreign country, industries would be encouraged to produce them in India itself. In this policy the government protected the domestic industries from foreign competition. Protection from imports took two forms: tariffs and quotas. Tariffs are a tax on imported goods; they make imported goods more expensive and discourage their use. Quotas specify the quantity of goods which can be imported. The effect of tariffs and quotas is that they the domestic firms from foreign The policy of protection was based on the notion that industries of developing countries were not in a position to compete against the goods produced by more developed economies. It was assumed that if the domestic industries were protected they would learn to compete in the course of time. Our planners also feared the possibility of foreign exchange being spent on import of luxury goods if no restrictions were placed on imports. Nor was any serious thought given to promote exports until the mid-1980s. Effect of Policies on Industrial Development: The achievements of India s industrial sector during the first seven plans are impressive indeed. The proportion of GDP contributed by the industrial sector increased in the period from 13 per cent in 1950-51 to 24.6 per cent in 1990-91. The rise in the industry s share of GDP is an important indicator of development. The six per cent annual growth rate of the industrial sector during the period is commendable. No longer was Indian industry restricted largely to cotton textiles and jute; in fact, the industrial sector became well diversified by 1990, largely due to INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 the public sector. The promotion of small-scale industries gave opportunities to those people who did not have the capital to start large firms to get into business. Protection from foreign competition enabled the development of indigenous industries in the areas of electronics and automobile sectors which otherwise could not have developed. In spite of the contribution made by the public sector to the growth of the Indian economy, some economists are critical of the performance of many public sector enterprises. It was proposed at the beginning of this chapter that initially public sector was required in a big way. It is now widely held that state enterprises continued to produce certain goods and services (often monopolising them) although this was no longer required. An example is the provision of telecommunication service. This industry continued to be reserved for the Public Sector even after it was realised that private sector firms could also provide it. Due to the absence of competition, even till the late 1990s, one had to wait for a long time to get a telephone connection. Another instance could be the establishment of Modern Bread, a bread-manufacturing firm, as if the Work These Out   Construct a pie chart for the following table on sectoral contribution to GDP and discuss the difference in the contribution of the sectors in the light of effects of development during 1950-91.   Conduct a debate in your classroom on the usefulness of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) by dividing the class into two groups. One group may speak in favour of PSUs and the other group against the motion (involve as many students as possible and encourage them to give examples). INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT private sector could not manufacture bread! In 2001 this firm was sold to the private sector. The point is that after four decades of Planned development of Indian Economy no distinction was made between (i) what the public sector alone can do and (ii) what the private sector can also do.  For example, even now only the public sector supplies national defense. And even though the private sector can manage hotels well, yet, the government also runs hotels. This has led some scholars to argue that the state should get out of areas which the private sector can manage and the government may concentrate its resources on important services which the private sector cannot Many public sector firms incurred huge losses but continued to function because it is difficult to close a government undertaking even if it is a drain on the nation s limited resources. This does not mean that private firms are always profitable (indeed, quite a few of the public sector firms were originally private firms which were on the verge of closure due to losses; they were then nationalised to protect the jobs of the workers). However, a loss-making private firm will not waste resources by being kept running despite the The need to obtain a license to start an industry was misused by industrial houses; a big industrialist would get a license not for starting a new firm but to prevent competitors from starting new firms. The excessive regulation of what came to be called the permit license raj prevented certain firms from becoming more efficient. More time was spent by industrialists in trying to obtain a license or lobby with the concerned ministries rather than on thinking about how to improve The protection from foreign competition was also being criticised on the ground that it continued even after it proved to do more harm than good. Due to restrictions on imports, the Indian consumers had to purchase whatever the Indian producers produced. The producers were aware that they had a captive market; so they had no incentive to improve the quality of their goods. Why should they think of improving quality when they could sell low quality items at a high price? Competition from imports forces our producers to be more efficient. A few economists also point out that the public sector is not meant for earning profits but to promote the welfare of the nation. The public sector firms, on this view, should be evaluated on the basis of the extent to which they contribute to the welfare of people and not on the profits they earn. Regarding protection, some economists hold that we should protect our producers from foreign competition as long as the rich nations continue to do so. Owing to all these conflicts, economists called for a change in our policy. This, alongwith other problems, led the government to introduce a new economic policy in 1991. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 The progress of the Indian economy during the first seven plans was impressive indeed. Our industries became far more diversified compared to the situation at independence. India became self- sufficient in food production thanks to the green revolution. Land reforms resulted in abolition of the hated zamindari system. In industrial sector, many economists became dissatisfied with the performance of many public sector enterprises. Excessive government regulation prevented growth of entrepreneurship. In the name of self- reliance, Indian producers were protected against foreign competition and this did not give them the incentive to improve the quality of goods that they produced. Indian policies were  inward oriented  that failed to develop a strong export sector. The need for reform of economic policy was widely felt in the context of changing global economic scenario, and the new economic policy was initiated in 1991 to make Indian economy more efficient. This is the subject of the next chapter.   After independence, India envisaged an economic system which combines the best features of socialism and capitalism this culminated in the mixed   All the economic planning has been formulated through five year plans.   Common goals of five year plans are growth, modernisation, self-sufficiency   The major policy initiatives in agriculture sector were land reforms and green revolution. These initiatives helped India to become self-sufficient in food grains production.   The proportion of people depending on agriculture did not decline as expected.   Import substitution policy initiatives in the industrial sector raised its contribution to GDP.   One of the major drawbacks in the industrial sector was the inefficient functioning of the public sector as it started incurring losses leading to drain on the nation s limited resources. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Define a plan. Why did India opt for planning? Why should plans have goals? What are High Yielding Variety (HYV) seeds? What is marketable surplus? Explain the need and type of land reforms implemented in the What is Green Revolution? Why was it implemented and how did it benefit the farmers? Explain in brief. Explain  growth with equity  as a planning objective. Does modernisation as a planning objective create contradiction in the light of employment generation? Explain. Why was it necessary for a developing country like India to follow self-reliance as a planning objective? What is sectoral composition of an economy? Is it necessary that the service sector should contribute maximum to GDP of an Why was public sector given a leading role in industrial development during the planning period? Explain the statement that green revolution enabled the government to procure sufficient food grains to build its stocks that could be used during times of shortage. While subsidies encourage farmers to use new technology, they are a huge burden on government finances. Discuss the usefulness of subsidies in the light of this fact. Why, despite the implementation of green revolution, 65 per cent of India s population continued to be engaged in the agriculture sector till 1990? Though public sector is very essential for industries, many public sector undertakings incur huge losses and are a drain on the economy s resources. Discuss the usefulness of public sector undertakings in the light of this fact. INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990 Explain how import substitution can protect domestic industry. Why and how was private sector regulated under the IPR 1956? Match the following: 1. Prime Minister Seeds that give large proportion of output 2. Gross Domestic B. Quantity of goods that can be imported C. Chairperson of the planning commission 4. Land Reforms D. The money value of all the final goods and services produced within the economy in one year 5. HYV Seeds Improvements in the field of agriculture to increase its productivity The monetary assistance given by government for production BHAGWATI, J. 1993. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford University Press, Delhi. DANDEKAR, V.M. 2004.  Forty Years After Independence, in Bimal  Jalan, (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi. JOSHI, VIJAY.  and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India s Economic Reforms 1991-2001. Oxford University Press, Delhi. MOHAN,  RAKESH. 2004. Industrial Policy and Controls, in Bimal  Jalan (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi. RAO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. 2004. Agriculture: Policy and Performance, in Bimal Jalan, (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, After forty years of planned development, India has been able to achieve a strong industrial base and became self-sufficient in the production of food grains. Nevertheless, a major segment of the population continues to depend on agriculture for its livelihood. In 1991, a crisis in the balance of payments led to the introduction of economic reforms in the country. This unit is an appraisal of the reform process and its implications for India. After studying this chapter, the learners will understand the background of the reform policies introduced in India understand the mechanism through which reform policies were comprehend the process of globalisation and its implications for India be aware of the impact of the reform process in various sectors. GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL You have studied in the previous chapter that, since independence, India followed the mixed economy framework by combining the advantages of the capitalist economic system with those of the socialist economic system. Some scholars argue that, over the years, this policy resulted in the establishment of a variety of rules and laws, which were aimed at controlling and regulating the economy, ended up instead in hampering the process of growth and development. Others state that India, which started its developmental path from near stagnation, has since been able to achieve growth in savings, developed a diversified industrial sector which produces a variety of goods and has experienced sustained expansion of agricultural output which has  ensured food security. In 1991, India met with an economic crisis relating to its external debt   the government was not able to make repayments on its borrowings from abroad; foreign exchange reserves, which we generally maintain to import petroleum and other important items, dropped to levels that were not sufficient for even a fortnight. The crisis was further compounded by rising prices of essential goods. All these led the government to introduce a new set of policy measures which changed the direction of our developmental strategies.  In this chapter, we will look at the background of the crisis, measures that the government has adopted and their impact on various sectors of the economy. The origin of the financial crisis can be traced from the inefficient management of the Indian economy in the 1980s. We know that for implementing various policies and its general administration, the government generates funds from various sources such as taxation, running of public sector enterprises etc. When  expenditure is more than income, the government borrows to finance the deficit from banks and also from people within the country and from international financial institutions. When we import goods like petroleum, we pay in dollars which we earn from our exports. even though the revenues were very low, the government had to overshoot its revenue to meet challenges like unemployment, continued spending on development the government was not able to There is a consensus in the world today that economic development is not all and the GDP is not necessarily a measure of progress of a society. K.R. Narayanan, Former President of India INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT generate sufficiently from internal sources such as taxation. When the government was spending a large share of its income on areas which do a need to utilise the rest of its revenue in a highly efficient manner. The meet the growing expenditure. At times, our foreign exchange, borrowed from other countries and international financial institutions, was spent on meeting consumption reduce such profligate spending nor sufficient attention was given to boost In the late 1980s, government expenditure began to exceed its revenue by such large margins that meeting the expenditure through borrowings became unsustainable. Prices of many essential goods rose sharply. Imports grew at a very high rate without matching growth of exchange reserves declined to a level that was not adequate to finance imports for more than two weeks. There was also not sufficient foreign exchange to pay the interest that needed to be paid to international funder was willing to lend to India. India approached the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), popularly known as World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and received $7 billion as loan to manage the crisis. For availing the loan, these international agencies expected India to liberalise and open up the economy by removing restrictions on the private sector, reduce the role of the government in many areas and remove trade restrictions between India and other India agreed to the conditionalities of World Bank and IMF and announced the New Economic Policy (NEP). The NEP consisted of wide ranging economic reforms. The thrust of the policies was towards creating a more competitive environment in the economy and removing the barriers to entry and growth of firms. This set of policies can broadly be classified into two groups: the stabilisation measures and the structural reform measures. Stabilisation measures are short- term measures, intended to correct some of the weaknesses that have developed in the balance of payments and to bring inflation under control. In simple words, this means that there was a need to maintain sufficient foreign exchange reserves and keep the rising prices under control. On the other hand, structural reform policies are long-term measures, aimed at improving the efficiency of the economy and increasing its international competitiveness by removing the rigidities in various segments of the Indian economy. The government initiated a variety of policies  which fall  under three heads LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL viz., liberalisation, privatisation and As pointed out in the beginning, rules and laws which were aimed at regulating the economic activities became major hindrances in growth and development. Liberalisation was introduced to put an end to these restrictions and open various sectors of the economy. Though a few liberalisation measures were introduced in 1980s in areas of industrial licensing, export-import policy, technology upgradation, fiscal policy and foreign investment, reform policies initiated in 1991 were more comprehensive. Let us study some important areas, such as the industrial sector, financial sector, tax reforms, foreign exchange markets and trade and investment sectors which received greater attention in and after 1991. Deregulation of Industrial Sector: In India, regulatory mechanisms were enforced in various ways (i) industrial had to get permission from government officials to start a firm, close a firm or decide the amount of goods that could be produced (ii) private sector was not allowed in many industries (iii) some goods could be produced only in small-scale industries, and (iv) controls on price fixation and distribution of selected industrial The reform policies introduced in and after 1991 removed many of these restrictions. Industrial licensing was abolished for almost all but product categories   alcohol, cigarettes, hazardous chemicals, industrial explosives, electronics, aerospace and drugs  and pharma- ceuticals. The only industries which are now reserved for the public sector are a part of atomic energy generation and some core activities in railway transport. Many goods produced by small-scale industries have now been dereserved. In most industries, the market has been allowed to determine the prices. Financial sector includes financial institutions, such as commercial banks, investment banks, stock exchange operations and foreign exchange market. The financial sector in India is regulated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may be aware that all banks and other financial institutions in India are regulated through various norms and regulations of the RBI. The RBI decides the amount of money that the banks can keep with themselves, fixes interest rates, nature of lending to various sectors, etc. One of the major aims of financial sector reforms is to reduce the role of RBI from regulator to facilitator of financial sector.  This means that the financial sector may be allowed to take decisions on many matters without consulting the RBI. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT The reform policies led to the establishment of private sector banks, Indian as well as foreign. Foreign investment limit in banks was raised to around 74 per cent. Those banks which fulfil certain conditions have been given freedom to set up new branches without the approval of the RBI and rationalise their existing branch networks. Though banks have been given permission to generate resources from India and abroad, certain managerial aspects  have been retained with the RBI to safeguard the interests of the account-holders and the nation. Foreign Institutional Investors (FII), such as merchant bankers, mutual funds and pension funds, are now allowed to invest in Indian financial Tax Reforms: Tax reforms are concerned with the reforms in the government s taxation and public expenditure policies, which are collectively known as its fiscal policy. There are two types of taxes: direct and indirect. Direct taxes consist of taxes on incomes of individuals, as well as, profits of business enterprises. Since 1991, there has been a continuous reduction in the taxes on individual incomes as it was felt that high rates of income tax were an important reason for tax evasion. It is now widely accepted that moderate rates of income tax encourage savings and voluntary disclosure of income. The rate of corporation tax, which was very high earlier, has been gradually reduced. Efforts have also been made to reform the indirect taxes, taxes levied on commodities, in order to facilitate the establishment of a common national market for goods and commodities. In the year 2016, Indian constitution was amended to empower state governments and union Government to come out with laws to impose Goods and Services Tax. This has led to introduction of GST in India. This is expected to generate additional revenue for the government, reduce tax evasion and create  one nation, one tax and one market. Another component of reform in this area is simplification. In order to encourage better compliance on the part of taxpayers, many procedures have been simplified and the rates also Foreign Exchange Reforms: The  first important reform in the external sector was made in the foreign exchange market. In 1991, as an immediate measure to resolve the balance of payments crisis, the rupee was devalued against foreign currencies. This led to an increase in the inflow of foreign exchange. It also set the tone to free the determination of rupee value in the foreign exchange market from government control. Now, more often than not,  markets  determine exchange rates based on the  demand and supply of foreign exchange. Trade and Investment Policy Reforms: Liberalisation of trade and investment regime was initiated to increase international competitiveness of industrial production and also foreign investments and technology into the economy. The aim was also to promote the efficiency of local industries and adoption of modern technologies. LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL Work These Out   Give an example each of nationalised bank, private bank, private foreign bank, FII and a mutual fund.   Visit a bank in your locality with your parents. Observe and find out the functions it performs. Discuss the same with your classmates and prepare a chart on it.   Find out from your parents if they pay taxes. If yes, why do they do so and   Do you know that for a very long time  countries used to keep silver and gold as reserves to make payments abroad? Find out in what form do we keep our foreign exchange reserves and find out from newspapers, magazines and the Economic Survey how much foreign exchange reserves India had during the last year. Also  find the foreign currency of the following countries and its latest rupee exchange rate. Value of 1(one) unit of foreign currency in Indian rupee In order to protect domestic industries, India was following a regime of quantitative restrictions on imports. This was encouraged through tight control over imports and by keeping the tariffs very high. These policies reduced efficiency and competitiveness which led to slow growth of the manufacturing sector. The trade policy reforms aimed at (i) dismantling of  quantitative restrictions on imports and exports (ii) reduction of tariff rates and (iii) removal of licensing procedures for imports. Import licensing was abolished except environmentally sensitive industries. Quantitative restrictions on imports of manufactured consumer goods and agricultural products were also fully removed from April 2001. Export duties have been removed to increase the competitive position of Indian goods in the international markets. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT It implies shedding of the ownership or management of a government owned enterprise. Government companies are converted into private companies in two ways (i) by withdrawal of the government from ownership and management of public sector companies and or (ii) by outright sale of public sector Privatisation of the public sector enterprises by selling off part of the equity of PSEs to the public is known as disinvestment. The purpose of the sale, according to the government, was mainly to improve financial discipline and facilitate modernisation. It was also envisaged that private capital and managerial capabilities could be effectively utilised to improve the performance of the PSUs. Box 3.1: Navratnas and Public Enterprise Policies You must have read in your childhood about the famous Navratnas or Nine Jewels in the Imperial Court of King Vikramaditya who were eminent persons of excellence in the fields of art, literature and knowledge. In order to improve efficiency, infuse professionalism and enable them to compete more effectively in the liberalised global environment, the government identifies PSEs and declare them as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas. They were given greater managerial and operational autonomy, in taking various decisions to run the company efficiently and thus increase their profits. Greater operational, financial and managerial autonomy has also been granted to profit-making enterprises referred to as miniratnas. The Central Public Sector Enterprises are designated with different status. A few examples of public enterprises with their status are as follows: (i) Maharatnas   (a) Indian Oil Corporation Limited, and (b) Steel Authority of India Limited, (ii) Navratnas   (a) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, (b) Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited; and (iii) Miniratnas   (a) Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited; (b) Airport Authority of India and (c) Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited. Many of these profitable PSEs were originally formed during the 1950s and 1960s when self-reliance was an important element of public policy. They were set up with the intention of providing infrastructure and direct employment to the public so that quality end-product reaches the masses at a nominal cost and the companies themselves were made accountable to all stakeholders. The granting of status resulted in better performance of these companies. Scholars allege that instead of facilitating public enterprises in their expansion and enabling them to become global players, the government partly privatised them through disinvesment. Of late, the government has decided to retain them in the public sector and enable them to expand themselves in the global markets and raise resources by themselves from financial markets. LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL The government envisaged that privatisation could provide strong impetus to the inflow of FDI. The government has also made attempts to improve the efficiency of PSUs by giving them autonomy in taking managerial decisions. For instance, some PSUs have been granted special status as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas (see Although globalisation is generally understood to mean integration of the economy of the country with the world economy, it is a complex phenomenon. It is an outcome of the set of various policies that are aimed at transforming interdependence and integration. It involves creation of networks and activities transcending economic, social Globalisation attempts to establish links in such a way that the happenings in India can be influenced by events happening miles away. It is turning the world into one whole or creating a borderless world. Outsourcing: This is one of the globalisation process. In outsourcing, a company hires regular service from external sources, mostly from other countries, which was previously provided internally or from within the country (like legal advice, computer service, advertisement, security   departments of the company). As a form of economic activity, outsourcing has intensified, in recent times, because of the growth of fast modes of communication,  particularly  the growth of  Information Technology (IT). Many of the services such as voice-based business processes (popularly known as BPO or call centres), record keeping, Work These Out   Some scholars refer to disinvestment as the wave of privatisation spreading all over the world to improve the performance of public sector enterprises whereas others call it as outright sale of public property to the vested interests. What do you think?   Prepare a poster which contains 10-15 news clippings which you consider as important and relating to navaratnas from newspapers. Also collect the logos and advertisements of these PSEs. Put these on the notice board and discuss them in the classroom.   Do you think only loss making companies should be privatised? Why?   Losses incurred by public sector enterprises are to be met out of the public budget. Do you agree with this statement? Discuss. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT accountancy, banking services, music transcription, clinical advice or even teaching are being outsourced by companies in developed countries to India. With the help of modern telecommunication links including the Internet, the text, voice and visual data in respect of these services is digitised and transmitted in real time over continents and national boundaries. Most multinational corporations, and even small companies, are outsourcing their services to India where they can be availed at a cheaper cost with reasonable degree of skill and accuracy. The low wage rates and availability of skilled manpower in India have made it a destination for global outsourcing in the post-reform World Trade Organisation (WTO): The WTO was founded in 1995 as the successor organisation to the General Agreement on Trade and Tariff (GATT). GATT was established in 1948 with 23 countries as the Box 3.2: Global Footprint! Owing to globalisation, you might find many Indian companies have expanded their wings to many other countries. For example, ONGC Videsh, a subsidiary of the Indian public sector enterprise, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation engaged in oil and gas exploration and production has projects in 16 countries. Tata Steel, a private company established in 1907, is one of the top ten global steel companies in the world which have operations in 26 countries and sell its products in 50 countries. It employs nearly 50,000 persons in other countries. HCL Technologies, one of the top five IT companies in India has offices in 31 countries and employs about 15,000 persons abroad. Dr Reddy's Laboratories, initially was a small company supplying pharmaceutical goods to big Indian companies, today has manufacturing plants and research centres across the world. Source: www.rediff.com accessed on 14.10.2014. global trade organisation agreements by providing equal opportunities to all countries in the international market for trading purposes. WTO is expected to establish a rule-based trading regime in which nations cannot place arbitrary restrictions on trade. In addition, its purpose is also to enlarge Fig. 3.1 Outsourcing: a new employment opportunity in big cities LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL production and trade of services, to ensure optimum utilisation of world resources  and to protect the environment. The WTO agreements cover trade in goods as well as services to facilitate international trade (bilateral and multilateral) through removal of tariff as well as non-tariff barriers and providing greater market access to all member countries. As an important member of WTO, India has been in the forefront of framing fair global rules, regulations and safeguards and advocating the interests of the developing world. India has kept its commitments towards liberalisation of trade, made in the WTO, by removing quantitative restrictions on imports and reducing Growth of GDP and Major Sectors (in %) Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Note: *Data pertaining to Gross Value Added (GVA). The GVA is estimated from GDP by adding subsidies on production and subtracting indirect taxes. Work These Out   Many scholars argue that globalisation is a threat as it reduces the role of the government in many sectors. Some counter argue that it is an opportunity as it opens up markets to compete in and capture. Debate in   Prepare a chart consisting of a list of five companies that have BPO services in India, along with their turnover   Did you attend online classes or watched videos of your teachers or any other teacher taking classes during the last year through television, mobile phone or computers due to Covid 19 Pandemic? Share your experiences related to information technology.   Is employment in call centres sustainable? What kinds of skills should people working in call centres acquire to get a regular income?   If the multinational companies outsource many services to countries like India because of cheap manpower, what will happen to people living in the countries where the companies are located? Discuss. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Some scholars question the usefulness of India being a member of the WTO as a major volume of international trade occurs among the developed nations. They also  say that while developed countries file complaints over agricultural subsidies given in their countries, developing countries feel cheated as they are forced to open their markets for developed countries but are not allowed access to the markets of developed countries. What do you think? period, the growth of agriculture has declined. While the industrial sector reported fluctuation, the growth of the service sector has gone up. This indicates that GDP growth is mainly driven by growth in the service sector. During 2012-15, there has been a setback in the growth rates of different sectors witnessed post 1991. While agriculture recorded a high growth rate during 2013 14, this sector witnessed negative growth in the subsequent year. While the service sector continued to witness a high level of growth   higher than the overall GDP growth in 2014 15, this sector witnessed the high growth rate of 9.8 per cent. The industrial sector witnessed a steep decline during 2012  13, in the subsequent years it began to show a continuous positive growth. The opening of the economy has led to a rapid increase in foreign direct investment and foreign exchange reserves. The foreign investment, which includes foreign direct investment (FDI) and foreign institutional investment (FII), has increased from about US $100 million in 1990-91 to US $ 30 billion in 2017-18. There has been an increase in the foreign exchange reserves from about US $ 6 billion in 1990-91 to about US $ 413 billion in 2018-19. India is one of the largest foreign exchange reserve holders in the world. Since 1991, India is seen as a successful exporter of auto parts, pharmaceutical goods engineering goods, IT software and textiles. Rising prices have also been kept under Fig. 3.2 IT industry is seen as a major contributor to India s exports 3.6 IN D I A N E C O N O M Y D U R I N G REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT The reform process has completed three decades since its introduction. Let us now look at the performance of  the Indian economy during this period. In economics, the growth of an economy is measured by the Gross Domestic Product. Look at Table 3.1. The post 1991 India witnessed a rapid growth in GDP on a continual basis for two decades. The   growth of GDP increased from 5.6 per cent during 1980 91 to 8.2 per cent during 2007 12. During the reform LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL Work These Out   In the previous chapter, you might have studied about subsidies in various sectors, including agriculture. Some scholars argue that subsidy in agriculture should be removed to make the sector internationally competitive. Do you agree? If so, how can it be done? Discuss in class.   Read the following passage and discuss in class. Groundnut is a major oilseed crop in Andhra Pradesh. Mahadeva, who was a farmer in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh, used to spend Rs. 10,000 for growing groundnut on his plot of half an acre. The cost included expenditure on raw material (seeds, fertilisers, etc.), labour, bullock power and machinery used. On an average, Mahadeva used to get two quintals of groundnut, and each quintal was sold for Rs. 7,000. Mahadeva, thus, was spending Rs. 10,000 and getting an income of Rs. 14,000. Anantpur district is a drought-prone area. As a result of economic reforms, the government did not undertake any major irrigation project. Recently, groundnut crop in Anantpur is facing problems due to crop disease. Research and extension work has gone down due to lower government expenditure. Mahadeva and his friends brought this matter repeatedly to the notice of the government officials entrusted with this responsibility, but failed. Subsidy was reduced on material (seeds, fertilisers) which increased Mahadeva s cost of cultivation. Moreover, the local markets were flooded with cheap imported edible oils, which was a result of removal of restriction on imports. Mahadeva was not able to sell his groundnut in the market as he was not getting the price to cover What could be done to farmers like Mahadeva from incurring losses? Discuss in the class. On the other hand, the reform process has been widely criticised for not being able to address some of the basic problems facing our economy especially in areas of employment, agriculture, industry, infrastructure development and fiscal Growth and Employment: Though the GDP growth rate has increased in the reform period, scholars point out that the reform-led growth has not generated sufficient employment opportunities in the country. You will study the link between different aspects of employment and growth in the INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reforms in Agriculture: Reforms have not been able to benefit agriculture, where the growth rate has Since 1991, public investment in agriculture sector especially in infrastructure, which includes irrigation, power, roads, market linkages and research and extension (which played a crucial role in the Green Revolution), has fallen. Further, the partial removal of fertiliser subsidy has led to increase in the cost of production, which has severely affected the small and marginal farmers. This sector has been experiencing a number of policy changes such as reduction in import duties on agricultural products, low minimum support price and lifting of quantitative restrictions on the imports of agricultural products. These have adversely affected Indian farmers as they now have to face increased Moreover, because of  export- oriented policy strategies in agriculture, there has been a shift from production for the domestic market towards production for the export market focusing on cash crops in lieu of production of food grains. This puts pressure on prices of food grains. Reforms in Industry: Industrial growth has also recorded a slowdown. This is because of decreasing demand of industrial products due to various reasons such as cheaper imports, inadequate investment in infrastructure etc. In a globalised world, developing countries are compelled to open up their economies to greater flow of goods and capital from developed countries and rendering their industries vulnerable to imported goods.  Cheaper imports have, thus, replaced the demand for domestic goods. Domestic manufacturers are facing competition from imports. The infrastructure facilities, including power supply, have remained inadequate due to lack of investment. Globalisation is, thus, often seen as creating conditions for the free movement of goods and services from foreign countries that adversely affect the local industries and employment opportunities in Moreover, a developing country like India still does not have the access to developed countries  markets because of high non-tariff barriers. For restrictions on exports of textiles and clothing have been removed in India, USA has not removed their quota restriction on import of textiles from India and China. Disinvestment: Every year, the government fixes a target for disinvestment of PSEs. For instance, in 1991-92, it was targeted to mobilise Rs 2500 crore through disinvestment. The government was able to mobilise ` 3,040 crore more than the target. In 2017 18, the target was about `1,00,000 crore, and the achievement was about ` 1,00,057 crore. Critics LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL point out that the assets of PSEs have been undervalued and sold to the private sector. This means that there has been a substantial loss to the government and the outright sale of public assets! Moreover, the proceeds from disinvestment are used to offset the shortage of government revenues rather than using it for  the development of PSEs and building social infrastructure in the country. Do you think selling a part of the properties of government companies is the best way to improve their Reforms and Fiscal Policies: Economic reforms have placed limits on the growth of public expenditure, especially in social sectors. The tax reductions in the reform period, aimed at yielding larger revenue and curb tax evasion, have not resulted in increase in tax revenue for the government. Also, Box 3.3: Siricilla Tragedy! Power sector reforms in many Indian states led to do away with the supply of electricity at subsidised rates and steep rise in power tariff. This has affected workers engaged in small industries. Powerloom textile industry in Andhra Pradesh is an example. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked to the production of cloth, power cut means cut in wages of weavers, who were already suffering from hike in tariff. A few years ago, this led to a crisis in the livelihood of the weavers and 50 powerloom workers committed suicide in a small town called  Siricilla  in Andhra Pradesh. Do you think the power tariff should not be raised? What would be your suggestions to revive small industries affected  by the reform  policies, involving tariff reduction, have curtailed the scope for raising revenue through custom duties. In order to attract foreign investment, tax incentives are provided to foreign investors which further reduced the scope for raising tax revenues. This has a negative impact on developmental and The process of globalisation through liberalisation and privatisation policies has produced positive, as well as, negative results both for India and other countries.  Some scholars argue that globalisation should be seen as an opportunity in terms of greater access to global markets, high technology and increased possibility of large industries of developing countries to become important players in the international arena. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT On the contrary, the critics argue that globalisation is a strategy of the developed countries to expand their markets in other countries. According to them, it has compromised the welfare and identity of people belonging to poor countries. It has further been pointed out that market- driven globalisation has widened the economic disparities among nations Viewed from the Indian context, some studies have stated that the crisis that erupted in the early 1990s was basically an outcome of the deep- rooted inequalities in Indian society and the economic reform policies initiated as a response to the crisis by the government, with externally advised policy package,  further aggravated the inequalities.  Further, it has increased the income and quality of consumption of only high- income groups and the growth has some select areas in the services sector information technology, finance, entertainment, travel and hospitality services, real estate and trade, rather than vital sectors such as agriculture and industry which provide livelihoods to millions of people in the country.   The economy was facing problems of declining foreign exchange, growing imports without matching rise in exports and high inflation. India changed its economic policies in 1991 due to a financial crisis and pressure from international organisations like the World Bank and IMF.   In the domestic economy, major reforms were undertaken in the industrial and financial sectors. Major external sector reforms included foreign exchange deregulations and import liberalisation.   With a view to improving the performance of the public sector, there was a consensus on reducing its role and opening it up to the private sector. This was done through disinvestment and liberalisation measures.   Globalisation is the outcome of the policies of liberalisation and privatisation. It means an integration of the economy of the country with the world economy.   Outsourcing is emerging as a major activity in industrial and service   The objective of the WTO is to establish a rule based trade regime to ensure optimum utilisation of world resources.   During the reforms, growth of agriculture and industry has gone down but the service sector has registered growth.   Reforms have not benefited the agriculture sector. There has also been a decline in public investment in this sector.   Industrial sector growth has slowed down due to availability of cheaper imports and lower investment. LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL Why were reforms introduced in India? Why is it necessary to became a member of WTO? Why did RBI have to change its role from controller to facilitator of financial sector in India? How is RBI controlling the commercial banks? What do you understand by devaluation of rupee? Distinguish between the following Strategic and Minority sale Bilateral and Multi-lateral trade Tariff and Non-tariff barriers. Why are tariffs imposed? What is the meaning of quantitative restrictions? Those public sector undertakings which are making profits should  be privatised. Do you agree with this view? Why? Do you think outsourcing is good for India? Why are developed countries opposing it? India has certain advantages which makes it a favourite  outsourcing destination. What are these advantages? Do you think the navaratna policy of the government helps in improving the performance of public sector undertakings in India? What are the major factors responsible for the high growth of the Agriculture sector appears to be adversely affected by the reform Why has the industrial sector performed poorly in the reform Discuss economic reforms in India in the light of social justice INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT The table given below shows the GDP growth rate at 2011-12 prices. You have studied about the techniques of presentation of data in your Statistics for Economics course. Draw a time series line graph based on the data given in the table and inter pret the same. GDP Growth Rate (%) Observe around you   you will find State Electricity Boards (SEBs), BSES and many public and private organisations sup- plying electricity in different states and union territories. There are private buses on roads alongside the goverment bus services and What do you think about this dual system of the co-existence of public and private sectors? What are the merits and demerits of such a dual system? With the help of your parents and grandparents prepare a list of multinational companies that existed in India at the time of independence. Now put a ( ) mark against those which are still growing and a ( ) against those which do not exist any more. Are there any companies whose names have changed? Find out the new names, the country of origin, nature of product, logo and prepare charts and display in your class. SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL Give appropriate examples for the following: Nature of Product Name of a Foreign Company TV and Refrigerators Now, find out if these companies which are mentioned above existed in India before 1991, or came after the New Economic Policy. For this, take the help of your teacher, parents, grandparents and shopkeepers. Collect a few relevant newspaper cuttings and from the internet on meetings organised by WTO. Discuss the issues debated in these meetings, and find out how WTO facilitates world trade. Was it necessary for India to introduce economic reforms at the behest of World Bank and International Monetary Fund? Was there no alternative for the government to solve the balance of pay- ments crisis? Discuss in the classroom. ACHARYA, S. 2003. India s Economy: Some Issues and Answers. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. ALTERNATIVE SURVEY GROUP. 2005. Alternative Economic Survey, India 2004 05, Disequalising Growth. Daanish Books, Delhi. AHLUWALIA, I.J. and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1998. India s Economic Reforms and Development. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. BARDHAN, PRANAB. 1998. The Political Economy of Development in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi. BHADURI, AMIT  and DEEPAK NAYYAR. 1996. The Intelligent Person s Guide to Liberalisation. Penguin, Delhi. BHAGWATI, JAGDISH. 1992. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford University Press, Delhi. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT B YRES, T ERENCE J. 1997. The State, Development Planning and Liberalisation in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi. CHADHA, G.K. 1994. Policy Perspectives in Indian Economic Development. CHELLIAH, RAJA J. 1996. Towards Sustainable Growth: Essays in Fiscal and Financial Sector Reforms in India. Oxford University Press, New DEBROY, B. and RAHUL MUKHERJI (Eds.). 2004. The Political Economy of Reforms. Bookwell Publication, New Delhi. DREZE, JEAN and AMARTYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and Social Opportunity. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. DUTT, RUDDAR AND K.P.M. SUNDARAM. 2005. Indian Economy. S. Chand and Company, New Delhi. GUHA, ASHOK  (Ed.) 1990. Economic Liberalisation, Industrial Structure and Growth in India. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. JALAN, BIMAL. 1993. India s Economic Crisis: The Way Ahead. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. JALAN, BIMAL. 1996. India s Economic Policy: Preparing for the Twenty First Century. Viking, Delhi. JOSHI, VIJAY and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India s Economic Reforms 1991-2001. Oxford University Press, New Delhi, KAPILA, Uma. 2020. Indian Economy: Performences and Policies. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. MAHAJAN, V.S. 1994. Indian Economy Towards 2000 A.D. Deep & Deep, PAREKH, KIRIT and RADHAKRISHNA, 2002, India Development Report 2001-02. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. RAO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. and HANS LINNEMANN. 1996. Economic Reforms and Poverty Alleviation in India, Sage Publication, Delhi. SACHS, JEFFREY D., ASHUTOSH VARSHNEY and NIRUPAM BAJPAI.1999. India in the Era of Economic Reforms. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. Government Reports and Websites Economic Survey for various years. Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Published by Oxford University Press, New Delhi. Tenth Five Year Plan 1997-2002. Vol. 1. Government of India, Planning Commission, New Delhi. Appraisal Document of Twelfth Five Year Plan 2012-2017, NITI Aayog, Government of India. Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Reserve Bank of India for various CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE After studying this chapter, the learners will understand the concepts of Human Resource, Human Capital Formation and Human the links between investment in human capital, economic growth and the need for government spending on education and health the state of India s educational attainment. FORMATION IN INDIA HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA Think of one factor that has made a great difference in the evolution of mankind. Perhaps it is human capacity to store and transmit knowledge which they have been doing through conversation, through songs and through elaborate lectures. But humans soon found out that we need a good deal of training and skill to do things efficiently. We know that the labour skill of an educated person is more than that of an uneducated person and hence the former is able to generate more income than the latter and his or her contribution to economic growth is, consequently, more. Education is sought not only as it confers higher earning capacity on people but also for its other highly valued benefits: it gives one a better social standing and pride; it enables one to make better choices in life; it provides knowledge to understand the changes taking place in society; it also stimulates innovations. Moreover, the availability of educated labour force facilitates adaptation of new... the wisdom of expending public and private funds on education is not to be measured by its direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment, to give the masses of  people much greater opportunities than they can generally avail themselves of. For by this means many, who would have died unknown, are enabled to get the start needed for bringing out their latent abilities. Fig. 4.1 Adequate education and training to  farmers can raise productivity in farms INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT technologies. Economists have stressed the need for expanding educational opportunities in a nation as it accelerates the development process. 4.2 WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL? Just as a country can turn physical resources like land into physical capital like factories, similarly, it can also turn human resources like nurses, farmers, teachers, students into human capital like engineers and doctors. Societies need sufficient human capital in the first place  in the form of competent people who have themselves been educated and trained as professors and other professionals. In other words, we need good human capital to produce other human capital (say, nurses, farmers, teachers, doctors, engineers...). This means that we need investment in human capital to produce more human capital out of Let us understand a little more of what human capital means by posing the following questions: (i) What are the sources of human (ii) Is there any relation between human capital and economic growth of a country? (iii) Is the formation of human capital linked to people s all-round development or, as it is now called, (iv) What role can the  government play in human capital formation 4.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL Investment in education is considered as one of the main sources of human capital. There are several other sources as well. Investments in health, on- the- job training, migration and information are the other sources of human capital Why do your parents spend money on education? Spending on education by individuals is similar to spending on capital goods by companies with the objective of increasing future profits over a period of time. Likewise, individuals invest in education with the objective of increasing their future income. Like education, health is also considered as an important input for the development of a nation as much as it is important for the development of an individual. Who can work better  a sick person or a person with sound health? A sick labourer without access to medical facilities is compelled to abstain from work and there is loss of productivity. Hence, expenditure on health is an important source of human capital formation. Work This Out   Identify and collect the data from three families from different strata (i) very poor (ii) middle class and (iii) expenditure pattern of the families on education of male and female children. HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA The amount of money spent on preventive during illness), social medicine (spread of health literacy) and provision of clean drinking water and good sanitation are the various forms of health expenditures. Health expenditure directly increases the supply of healthy labour force and is, thus, a source of Firms spend on This may take one, the workers may be trained in the firm itself under the supervision of a skilled worker; two, the workers may be sent for off-campus training. In both these cases firms incur some expenses. Firms will, thus, insist that the workers should work for a specific period of time, after their on-the-job training, during which it can recover the benefits of the enhanced productivity owing to the training. Expenditure regarding on- the-job training is a source of human capital formation as the return of such expenditure in the form of enhanced labour productivity is more than the cost of it. People migrate in search of jobs that fetch them higher salaries than what they may get in their native places. Unemployment is the reason for the rural-urban migration in India. Technically qualified persons, like engineers and doctors, migrate to other countries because of higher salaries that they may get in such countries. Migration in both these cases involves cost of transport, higher cost of living in the migrated places and psychic costs of living in a strange socio- cultural setup. The enhanced earnings in the new place outweigh the costs of migration; hence, expenditure on migration is also a source of human information relating to the labour market and other markets like education and health. For example, people want to know the level of salaries associated with various types of jobs, whether the educational institutions provide the right type of employable skills and at what cost. This information is necessary to make decisions regarding investments in human capital as well as for efficient utilisation of the acquired human capital stock. Expenditure incurred for acquiring information relating to the labour market and other markets is also a source of human capital formation. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Box 4.1: Physical and Human Capital Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions. Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one s knowledge in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of return to a range of investments and then rationally decides which one of the investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the conscious decision of the owner    the physical capital formation is mainly an economic and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place in one s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximise her/his earnings. Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their parents and the society. The peers, educators and society influence the decisions regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college level. Moreover, the human capital formation at this stage is dependent upon the already formed human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly a social process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital. You know that the owner of a physical capital, say a bus, need not be present in the place where it is used; whereas, a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of people and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold in the market; only the services of the human capital are sold and, hence, there arises the necessity of the owner of the human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner. The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports, whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure by the state and the individuals. Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation and change of technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes place with ageing but can be reduced, to a large extent, through continuous investment in education, health, etc. This investment also facilitates the human capital to cope with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital. Nature of benefits flowing from human capital are  different from that of physical capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This is called external benefit. An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic process and contribute to the socio-economic progress of a nation. A healthy person, by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those who pay the price for the product and services produced by it. HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital. There are some similarities between the two forms of capital; there are some striking dissimilarities as well. See Box 4.1. Human Capital and Economic Growth: Who contributes more to national income    a worker in a factory or a software professional? We know that the labour skill of an educated person is more than that of an uneducated person and that the former generates more income than the latter. Economic growth means the increase in real national income of a country; naturally, the contribution of the educated person to economic growth is more than that of an illiterate person. If a healthy person could provide uninterrupted labour supply for a longer period of time, then health is also an important factor for economic growth. Thus, both education and health, along with many other factors like on-the-job training, job market information and migration, increase an Fig. 4.2 Creating human capital: a school being run in make shift premises in Delhi Look at Fig. 4.2 What are the advantages of having proper  classroom ? Do you think the children going to this schol are receiving quality education? Why these schools do not INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT individual s income generating This enhanced productivity of human beings or human capital contributes substantially not only productivity but also stimulates innovations and creates ability to absorb new technologies. Education provides knowledge to understand changes in society and scientific advancements, thus, facilitate inventions and innovations. Similarly, the availability of educated labour force facilitates adaptation to new Empirical evidence to prove that increase in human capital causes economic growth is rather nebulous. This may be because of measurement problems. For example, education measured in terms of years of schooling, teacher-pupil ratio and enrolment rates may not reflect the quality of education; health services measured in monetary terms, life expectancy and mortality rates may not reflect the true health status of the people in a country. Using the indicators mentioned above, an analysis of improvement in education and health sectors and growth in real per capita income in both developing and developed countries shows that there is convergence in the measures of human capital but no sign of convergence of per capita real income. In other words, the human capital growth in developing countries has been faster but the growth of per capita real income has not been that fast. There are reasons to believe that the causality between human capital and economic growth flows in either directions. That is, higher income causes building of high level of human capital and vice versa, that is, high level of human capital causes growth of India recognised the importance of human capital in economic growth long ago. The Seventh Five Year Plan says,  Human resources development (read human capital) has necessarily to be assigned a key role in any development strategy, particularly in a country with a large population. Trained and educated on sound lines, a large population can itself become an asset in accelerating economic growth and in ensuring social change in desired directions.  It is difficult to establish a relation of cause and effect from the growth of human capital (education and health) to economic growth but we can see in Fig. 4.3 Scientific and technical manpower: a rich ingredient of human capital HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA Table  4.1 that these sectors have grown simultaneously. Growth in each sector probably has reinforced the growth of every other sector. The National Education Policy 2020 states that the world is undergoing rapid changes in the knowledge landscape. With various dramatic scientific and technological advances, such as the rise of big data, machine learning, and artificial intelligence, many unskilled jobs worldwide may be taken over by machines, while the need for a skilled workforce, particularly involving mathematics, computer science, and data science, in conjunction with multidisciplinary abilities across the sciences and social sciences, and humanities, will be increasingly in greater demand. With climate change, increasing pollution, and depleting natural resources, there will be a sizeable shift in how we meet the world s, water, food, and sanitation needs, again resulting in the need for new skilled labour, particularly in agriculture, climate science, and social science. The growing emergence of epidemics and pandemics will also call for collaborative research in infectious development of vaccines and the resultant social issues heightens the need for multidisciplinary learning. There will be a growing demand for humanities and art, as India moves towards becoming a developed country as well as Select Indicators of Development in Education and Health Sectors Real Per Capita  Income (in Rs) Rate (Per 1,000 Population) Infant Mortality Rate at Birth (in Y Literacy Rate (%) Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance; National Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India. Fig. 4.4  Job on hand: transforming India into a INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT among the three largest economies in the world. This policy vision suggests how human capital formation in India will move its economy to a higher growth trajectory based on knowledge 4.4 HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN The two terms sound similar but there is a clear distinction between them. Human capital considers education and health as a means to increase development is based on the idea that education and health are integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to read and write and the ability to lead a long will be able to make other choices which they value. Human capital treats human beings as a means to an end; the end being the increase in productivity. In this view, any investment in education and health is unproductive if it does not enhance output of goods and services. In the human development perspective, human beings are ends in themselves. Human welfare should be increased through investments in education and health even if such investments do not result in higher labour productivity. Therefore, basic education and basic health are important in themselves, irrespective of their contribution to labour productivity. In such a view, every individual has a right to get basic education and basic health care, that is, every individual has a right to be literate and lead a healthy life. Box 4.2: India as a Knowledge Economy The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the past two decades. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, e- governance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss. Work This Out   If a construction worker, maid-servant, dhobi or a peon in school has absented herself/himself for long due to ill health, find out how it has affected her/his (i) job security What could be the possible HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 4.5 STATE OF HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA In this section we are going to analyse human capital formation in India. We have already learnt that human capital formation is the outcome of investments in education, health, on-the-job training, migration and information. Of these education and health are very important sources of human capital formation. We know that India is a federal country with a union government, state governments and local governments (Municipal Corporations, Municipalities and Village Panchayats). The Constitution of India mentions the functions to be carried out by each level of government. Accordingly, expendi- tures on both education and health are to be carried out simultaneously by all the three tiers of the government. Analysis of health sector is taken up in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse only the education sector here. Do you know who takes care of education and health in India? Before sector in India, we will look into the need for government intervention in education and health sectors. We do understand that education and health care services create both private and social benefits and this is the reason for the existence of both private and health service markets. Expenditures on education and health make cannot be easily reversed; hence, instance, once a child is admitted to a school or health care centre where the required services are not provided, before the decision is taken to shift the amount of damage would have been done. Moreover, individual consumers of these services do not have complete information about the quality of services and their costs. In this situation, the providers of education and health services acquire monopoly power and are involved in exploitation. The role of government in this situation these services adhere to the standards stipulated by the government and charge the correct price. In India, the ministries of organisations like National Council of Educational Research and Training (UGC) and All India Council of institutions which come under the education sector. Similarly, the ministries of health at the union and state level, departments of health and various organisations like National Medical Commission and Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) In a developing country like India, with a large section of the population living below the poverty line, many people cannot afford to access basic education and health care facilities. Moreover, a substantial section of India s population cannot afford INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT to reach super specialty health care and higher education. Furthermore, when basic education and health care is considered as a right of the citizens, then it is essential that the government should provide education and health services free of cost for the deserving citizens and those from the socially oppressed classes. Both, the union and state governments, have been stepping up expenditures in the education sector over the years in order to fulfil the objective of attaining cent per cent literacy and considerably increase the average educational attainment of Indians. the development of education in the country. During 1952-2020, education expenditure as percentage of total government expenditure increased from 7.92 to 16.54 and as percentage of GDP increased from 0.64 to 4.47. Throughout this period the increase in education expenditure has not been uniform and there has been irregular rise and fall. To this if we include the private expenditure incurred by individuals and by philanthropic institutions, the total education expenditure should be Elementary education takes a major share of total education expenditure and the share of the higher/tertiary education (institutions of higher learning like colleges, polytechnics and universities) is the least. Though, on an average, the government spends less on tertiary education,  expenditure per student  in tertiary education is higher than that of elementary. This does not mean that financial resources should be transferred from tertiary education to elementary education. As we expand school education, we need more teachers who are trained in the higher educational institutions; therefore, expenditure on all levels of education should be increased. 21, the per capita public expenditure on elementary education differs considerably across states from as high as Rs 96,968 in Sikkim to as low as Rs 10,710 in Bihar. This leads to differences in educational opportunities and attainments across 4.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA Growth in Government Expenditure on Education: Do you know how much the government spends on education? This expenditure by the government is expressed in two ways (i) as a percentage of  total government expenditure  (ii) as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The percentage of  education expenditure of total government expenditure  indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things before the government. The percentage of  education expenditure of GDP  expresses how much of people s income is being committed to Work This Out   Identify the objectives and functions of NCERT, UGC, AICTE and ICMR. HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA of the expenditure on education if we compare it with the desired level of by the various commissions. The Education Commission (1964 66) had GDP be spent on education so as to make a noticeable rate of growth in Majumdar Committee, appointed by the Government of India in 1999, 1.37 lakh crore over 10 years (1998- 99 to 2006-07) to bring all Indian children in the age group of 6-14 years under the purview of school desired level of education expenditure of around 6 per of a little over 4 per cent has been quite inadequate. In needs to be reached this the Government of India enacted the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act to make free education a fundamental right of all children in the age group of 6-14 Government of India has  also started levying a 2 per cent  education cess  on all Union taxes. The revenues from education cess has been earmarked for spending on elementary education. In addition to this, the government sanctions a large outlay for the promotion of higher education and Fig. 4.5 Investment in educational infrastructure is inevitable Work These Out   Prepare case studies of dropouts at different levels of schooling, say Class VIII dropouts Class X dropouts Find out the causes and discuss in the class.    School dropouts are giving way to child labour. Discuss how this is a loss to human capital. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Educational Attainment in India Adult Literacy Rate (per cent of people aged 15+) Primary completion rate (per cent of relevant age group) Youth literacy rate (per cent of people aged 15+ to 24) new loan schemes for students to pursue higher education. Educational Achievements in India: Generally,  educational achievements in a country are of adult literacy level, primary education completion rate and youth literacy rate. These statistics for the last two decades are given above in 4.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS Education for All   Still a Distant Dream: Though literacy rates for both   adults as  well as  youth   have increased, still the absolute number of illiterates in India is as much as India s population was at the time of independence. In 1950, when the Constitution of India was passed by the Constituent Assembly, it was noted in the Directive Principles of the Fig. 4.6 School dropouts give way to child labour: a loss to human capital HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA Constitution that the government should provide free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14 years within 10 years from the commencement of the Constitution. Had we achieved this, we would have cent per cent literacy by now. Gender Equity   Better than Before: The differences in literacy rates between males and females are narrowing signifying a positive development in gender equity; still  the need to promote education for women in India is imminent for various reasons such as improving economic independence and social status of women and also because women education makes a favourable impact on fertility rate and health care of women and children. Therefore, we cannot be complacent about the upward movement in the literacy rates and we have miles to go in achieving  cent per cent adult literacy. is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the year 2011-12, the rate of unemployment among youth males who studied graduation and above in of them are unemployed. In contrast to this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary level educated youth in rural and urban areas were unemployed. as indicated by the Periodic Labour Force Survey 2022- the government should increase improve the standard of higher institutions. When compared to less educated, a large proportion of educated persons are unemployed. The economic and social benefits of human capital formation and human development are well known. The union and state governments in India have been earmarking substantial financial outlays for development of education and health sectors. The spread of education and health services across different sectors of society should be ensured so as to simultaneously attain economic growth and equity. India has a  rich stock of scientific and technical manpower in the world.  The need of the hour is to better it qualitatively and provide such conditions so that they are utilised in India. Fig. 4.7 Higher Education:  few takers Higher Education   a Few Takers: The Indian education pyramid is steep, indicating lesser and lesser number of people reaching the higher education level. Moreover, the level of INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT What are the two major sources of human capital in a country? What are the indicators of educational achievement in a country? Why do we observe regional differences in educational attainment Bring out the differences between human capital and human How is human development a broader term as compared to human What factors contribute to human capital formation?   Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that it will increase future income sources.   Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and information are the sources of human capital formation.   The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital. There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms of capital formation.   Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth   Human development is based on the idea that education and health are integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be able to make other choices which they value.   The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things for the government. HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA How government organisations facilitate the functioning of schools and hospitals in India? Education is considered to be an important input for the development of a nation. How? Discuss the following as a source of human capital formation (i)  Health infrastructure (ii)  Expenditure on migration. Establish the need for acquiring information relating to health and education expenditure for the effective utilisation of human How does investment in human capital contribute to growth?  There is a downward trend in inequality world-wide with a rise in the average education levels. Comment. Examine the role of education in the economic development of a Explain how investment in education stimulates economic growth. Bring out the need for on-the-job-training for a person. Trace the relationship between human capital and economic growth. Discuss the need for promoting women s education in India. Argue in favour of the need for different forms of government intervention in education and health sectors. What are the main problems of human capital formation in India? In your view, is it essential for the government to regulate the fee structure in education and health care institutions? If so, why? Identify how Human Development Index is calculated. What is the position of India in the World Human Development Index? Is India going to be a knowledge based economy in the near future? Discuss in the classroom. Interpret the data given in Table 4.2. As an educated person, what will be your contribution to the cause of education? (Example  Each one   teach one ). SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Enlist the various sources that provide information regarding education, health and labour. Read the annual reports of Union Ministries of Education and Health and Family welfare and make summaries. Read the chapter on social sector in the Economic Survey. These can be downloaded from websites of the respective Union Government Ministries. BECKER, GARY S. 1964. Human Capital. 2nd Edition, Columbia University Press, New Y FREEMAN, RICHARD. 1976. The Overeducated American. Academic Press, SIDDHARTHAN, N.S. AND K. NARAYANAN (Eds.). 2013. Human Capital and Development   The Indian Experience. Springer, New Delhi. India Human Development Report 2011: Towards Social Inclusion, Plan- ning Commission, Government of India. Educational Statistics At a glance, Ministry of Education (for various years), Government of India. Annual Reports, Ministry of Education, Government of India. National Education Policy 2020, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India, ROSARIO, JYOTSNA AND K.R. SHANMUGAM. 2023. Impact of Transfers on Elementary Education Expenditure and Measuring Equalisation Transfers to Indian States. Working Paper 241/2023, Madras School Economics, Chennai. After studying this chapter, the learners will understand rural development and the major issues associated with it appreciate how crucial the development of rural areas is for India s overall understand the critical role of credit and marketing systems in rural learn about the importance of diversification of productive activities to understand the significance of organic farming in sustainable INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Previously we have studied how poverty was a major challenge facing India. We also know that the majority of the poor live in rural areas where they do not have access to the basic necessities Agriculture is the major source of livelihood in the rural sector. Mahatma Gandhi once said that the real progress of India did not mean simply the growth and expansion of industrial urban centres but mainly the development of the villages. This idea of village development being at the centre of the overall development of the nation is relevant even today. Why is this so? Why should we attach such significance to rural development when we see around us fast growing cities with large industries and modern information technology hubs? It is because more than two-third of India s population depends on agriculture that is yet to become productive enough to provide for them;  one-fourth of rural India still lives in abject poverty. That is the reason why we have to see a developed rural India if our nation has to realise real progress. What, then, does rural 5.2 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT? Rural development is a comprehensive term. It essentially focuses on action for the development of areas that are lagging behind in the overall development of the village economy. Some of the areas which are challenging and need fresh initiatives for development in rural India include   Development of human resources   literacy, more specifically, female literacy, education and skill   health, addressing both sanitation and public health   Land reforms   Development of the productive resources of each locality   Infrastructure development like electricity, irrigation, credit, marketing, transport facilities including construction of village roads and feeder roads to nearby highways, facilities for agriculture research and extension, and   Special measures for alleviation of poverty and bringing about significant improvement in the living conditions of the weaker sections of the population emphasising access to productive employment All this means that people engaged in farm and non-farm activities in rural areas have to be provided with various means that help them increase the productivity. They also need to be given opportunities to diversify into various non-farm productive  Only the tillers of the soil live by the right. The rest form their train and eat only the bread of dependence. activities such as food processing. Enabling them better and more affordable access to healthcare, sanitation facilities at workplaces and homes and education for all would also need to be given top priority for rapid It was observed in an earlier chapter that although the share of s contribution to GDP was on a decline, the population dependent on this sector did not show any significant change. Further, after the initiation of reforms, the growth rate of agriculture sector decelerated to about 3 per cent per annum during 2012, which was lower than the earlier years.  In recent years, this sector has become volatile. During 2023-24, the GVA growth rate of agriculture and its allied sectors was about two per cent. Scholars identify decline in public investment since 1991 as the major reason for this. They also argue that inadequate infrastructure, lack of alternate employment opportunities in the industry or service sector, increasing casualisation of employment etc., further impede rural development. The impact of this phenomenon can be seen from the growing distress witnessed among farmers across different parts of India. Against this background, we will critically look at some of the crucial aspects of rural India like credit and marketing systems, agricultural diversification and the role of organic farming in promoting sustainable 5.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL Credit: Growth of rural economy depends primarily on infusion of capital, from time to time, to realise higher productivity in agriculture and on seeds, fertilisers, implements and other family expenses of marriage, At the time of independence, moneylenders and traders exploited small and marginal farmers and landless labourers by lending to them on high interest rates and by manipulating the accounts to keep them in a debt-trap. A major change occurred after 1969 when India adopted social banking and multi- agency approach to adequately meet the needs of rural credit. Later,  the Work These Out   On a monthly basis, go through the newspapers of your region and identify the problems raised by them in relation to rural areas and visit a nearby village and identify the problems faced by people there. Discuss this in the classroom.   Prepare a list of recent schemes and their objectives from the government website https://.rural.nic.in. Collect the details of how anyone of these schemes implemented in your region/rural neighbourhood areas. Discuss your observations in class. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Box 5.1: The Poor Women s Bank  Kudumbashree  is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised. Source:  www.kudumbashree.org. Visit this website and explore various other initiatives undertaken by this organisation. Identify some factors which contributed to their successes and discuss in the class. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) was set up in 1982 as an apex body to coordinate the activities of all institutions involved in the rural Revolution was a harbinger of major changes in the credit system as it led to the diversification of the portfolio of rural credit towards production- The institutional structure of rural banking today consists of a set of multi-agency institutions, namely, commercial banks, regional rural banks (RRBs), cooperatives and land development banks. They are expected to dispense adequate credit at cheaper rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups (henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill the gap in the formal credit system because the formal credit delivery mechanism has not only proven inadequate but has  also not been fully integrated into the overall rural social and community development. Since some kind of collateral is required, vast proportion of poor rural households were automatically out of the credit network. The SHGs promote thrift in small proportions by a minimum contribution from each member. From the pooled money, credit is given to the needy members to be repayable in rates. By May 2019, nearly 6 crore Work These Out   In your locality/neighbourhood, you might notice self-help groups providing credit. Attend few meetings of such self-help groups. Write a report on the profile of a self-help group. The profile may include   when it was started, the number of members, amount of savings and type of credit they provide and how borrowers use the loan.   You might also find that those who take a loan for starting self-employment activities but use it for other purposes. Interact with few such borrowers. Identify the reasons for not starting self employment activities and discuss in the classroom. women in India have become member in 54 lakh women SHGs. About ` 10- 15,000 per SHG and another `2.5 lakhs per SHG as a Community Investment of renovating fund to take up self employement for income generation. Such credit provisions are generally SHGs have helped in the empowerment are mainly confined to consumption purposes. Why are borrowers not spending for productive purposes? Rural Banking   a Critical Appraisal: Rapid expansion of the banking system had a positive effect on rural farm and non-farm output, income and employment, especially after the green revolution   it helped farmers to avail services and credit facilities and a variety of loans for meeting their prodution needs. Famines became events of the past; we have now achieved food security which is reflected in the abundant buffer stocks of grains. However, all is not well with our With the possible exception of the commercial banks, other formal institutions have failed to develop a culture of deposit mobilisation   lending to worthwhile borrowers and effective loan recovery. Agriculture loan default rates have been chronically high. Why farmers failed to pay back loans? It is alleged that farmers are deliberately refusing to pay back loans. What could be the reasons? of the rural banking sector has taken a backseat after reforms. To improve the as a part of a scheme known as Jan- Dhan Yojana. Those bank account holders can get Rs. 1-2 lakh accidental insurance coverage and overdraft facilities for Rs. 10,000 and get their jobs and works under MNREGA; old age pension and other social the government are Work These Out   In the last few years, you might have taken note   in your neighbourhood if you are living in rural areas or read in the newspapers or seen on TV   of farmers commiting suicides. Many such farmers had borrowed money for farming and other purposes. It was found that when they were unable to pay back due to crop failure, insufficient income and employment opportunities, they took such steps. Collect information relating to such cases and discuss in the classroom.   Visit banks that cater to rural areas. They may be primary agricultural cooperative banks, land development banks, regional rural banks or district cooperative banks. Collect details such as how many rural households borrowed from them,  amount generally borrowed, kinds of collateral used, interest rates and dues.   If farmers who borrowed from cooperative banks could not pay back due to crop failure and other reasons, their loans should be waived otherwise they may take drastic decisions like committing suicides. Do you agree? INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT need to keep minimum bank balance. promoted thrift habit and efficient allocation of financial resources particularly in rural areas. Banks also could mobile funds of more than Rs. 5.4 AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM Have you ever asked yourself how food grains, vegetables and fruits that we consume daily come from different parts of the country? The mechanism through which these goods reach different places depends on the market channels. Agricultural marketing is a process that involves the assembling, storage, processing, transportation, packaging, grading and distribution of different agricultural commodities across the country. Prior to independence, farmers, while selling their produce to traders, suffered from faulty weighing and prices prevailing in markets were often forced to sell at low prices. They not have proper storage facilities to keep back their produce for selling later at a Therefore, government intervention Let us discuss four such measures that were initiated to improve the marketing aspect. The first step was regulation of markets to create orderly and transparent marketing conditions. By and large, this policy benefited farmers as well as consumers. However, there is still a need to develop about 27,000 rural periodic markets as regulated market places to realise the full potential of rural markets. Second component is provision of physical infrastructure facilities like roads, railways, warehouses, godowns, cold storages and processing units. The current infrastructure facilities are quite inadequate to meet the growing demand and need to be improved. Cooperative Fig. 5.1 Regulated market yards benefit farmers as well as consumers marketing, in realising fair prices for farmers  products, is the third aspect of government initiative. The success of milk cooperatives in transforming the social and economic landscape of Gujarat and some other parts of the country is testimony to the role of cooperatives. However cooperatives have received a setback during the recent past due to inadequate coverage of farmer members, lack of appropriate link between marketing and processing cooperatives and inefficient financial management. The fourth element is the policy instruments like (i) assurance of minimum support prices (MSP) for agricultural products (ii) maintenance of buffer stocks of wheat and rice by Food Corporation of India and (iii) distribution of food grains and sugar through PDS. These instruments are aimed at protecting the income of the farmers and providing foodgrains at a subsidised rate to the poor. However, despite government intervention, private trade (by moneylenders, rural political elites, big merchants and rich farmers) predominates agricultural markets. The need for government intervention is imminent particularly when a large share of agricultural products,  is handled by the private sector. Agricultural marketing has come a long way with the intervention of the government in various forms. Some scholars argue that commercialisation of agriculture offers tremendous scope for farmers to earn higher incomes provided the government intervention is restricted. What do you think about Emerging Alternate Marketing Channels: It has been realised that if farmers directly sell their produce to consumers, it increases their incomes. Some examples of these channels are Apni Mandi (Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan); Hadaspar Mandi (Pune); Rythu Bazars (vegetable and fruit markets in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana) and Uzhavar Sandies (farmers markets in Tamil Nadu). Further, several national and multinational fast food chains are increasingly entering into contracts/ alliances with farmers to encourage Work These Out   Visit a nearby vegetable and fruit market. Observe and identify different characteristics of the market. Identify the place of origin of at least ten different fruits and vegetables and distance travelled to reach the market. Further, look at the modes of transport and its implication on prices.   Most small towns have regulated market yards. Farmers can go to these markets and sell their produce. They can also store their goods in the yard. Visit one regulated market yard; collect the details of its functioning, kind of goods coming to the yard and how prices are fixed. Prepare a detailed report and discuss in the class. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT them to cultivate farm products (vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired quality by providing them with not only seeds and other inputs but also assured procurement of the produce at pre- decided prices. It is argued that such arrangements will help in reducing the price risks of farmers and would also expand the markets for farm products. Do you think such arrangements raise incomes of small farmers. greater risk in depending exclusively Diversification towards new areas is necessary not only to reduce the risk from agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood options to rural people. Much of the agricultural employment activities are concentrated in the Kharif season. But during the Rabi season, in areas where there are inadequate  irrigation facilities, it becomes difficult to find gainful employment. Therefore expansion into other sectors is essential to provide supplementary gainful employment and in realising higher levels of income for rural people to tribulations. Hence, there is a need to focus on allied activities, non-farm employment and other emerging alternatives of livelihood, though there are many other options available for providing sustainable livelihoods in rural areas. In 2020, Indian Parliament passed three laws to reform agriculture marketing system. While some section of farmers support these reforms, the rest of the farmers oppose and these Acts are still being debated. Collect the details of these laws, debate and discuss in the class. 5.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE Diversification includes two aspects - one relates to change in cropping pattern and the other relates to a shift of workforce from agriculture to other allied activities (livestock, poultry, fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture sector. The need for diversification arises from the fact that there is Fig. 5.2 Jaggery making is an allied activity of the farming sector Work This Out  Visit one such alternative marketing system which farmers in your locality, or in the neighbourhood rural areas, use. How are they different from regulated market yards? Should they be encouraged and supported by the government? Why and how? Discuss. overcrowded, a major proportion of the increasing labour force needs to find alternate employment opportunities in other non-farm sectors. Non-farm economy has several segments in it; some possess dynamic linkages that permit healthy growth while others are in subsistence, low productivity propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors include agro-processing industries, food processing industries, leather industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors which have the potential but seriously lack infrastructure and other support include traditional home-based industries like pottery, crafts, handlooms etc. Majority of rural women find employment in agriculture while men generally look for non-farm employment. In recent times, women have also begun looking for non-farm jobs (see Box 5.2). Animal Husbandry: In India, the farming community uses the mixed crop-livestock farming system  cattle, goats, fowl are the widely held species. Livestock production provides increased stability in income, food security, transport, fuel and nutrition for the family without disrupting other food-producing activities. Today, livestock sector alone provides alternate livelihood options to over 70 million small and marginal farmers including landless labourers. A significant number of women also find employment in the livestock sector. Chart 5.1 shows the distribution of livestock in India. Poultry accounts for the largest share with 61 per cent Box 5.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) was a project initiated in the late 1980s in Tamil Nadu to train women in latest agricultural techniques and in organic farming. It encouraged women to actively participate in raising agricultural productivity and family income. At a Farm Women s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal, trained women are successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money from this venture. Many other Farm Women s Groups are creating savings in their group by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system.  With the accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like mushroom cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-generating activities. There could be similar initiatives in your area or your neighborhood rural areas. Talk to organisation or women entrepreneurs and discuss the details in the class. Chart 5.1: Distribution of Poultry and Livestock in India, 2019 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT followed by others. Other animals which include camels, asses, horses, ponies and mules are in the lowest rung. India had about 303 million cattle, including 110 million buffaloes in 2019. Performance of the Indian dairy sector over the last three decades has been quite impressive. Milk production in the country has increased by about twelve times 2021. This  can be attributed mainly to the successful implementation of  Operation Flood. It is a system whereby all the farmers can pool their milk produced according to different grading (based on quality), processed and marketed to urban centres through cooperatives. In this system the farmers are assured of a fair price and income from the supply of milk to urban markets. As pointed out earlier Gujarat state is held as a success story in the efficient implementation of milk cooperatives which has been emulated by many states. Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan, are major milk producing states. Meat, eggs, wool and other by- products are also emerging as important productive sectors for diversification. Fisheries: The fishing community regards the water body as  mother  or  provider. The water bodies consisting of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural aquatic ponds, streams etc. are, therefore, an integral and life-giving source for the fishing community. In India, after progressive increase in budgetary allocations and introduction of new technologies in fisheries and aquaculture, the development of fisheries has come a long way. Presently, fish production from inland sources contributes about 65 per cent to the total value of fish production and the balance 35 per cent comes from the marine sector (sea and oceans). Today total fish production accounts for 0.9 per cent of the total GDP. In India, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu are major fish producing states. A large share of fishworker families are poor. Rampant underemployment, low per capita earnings, absence of mobility of labour to other sectors and a high rate of illiteracy and indebtedness are some of the major problems fishing community face today. Even though women are not involved in active fishing, about 60 per cent of the workforce in export marketing and 40 per cent in internal marketing are women. There is a need to increase credit facilities through cooperatives and SHGs for fisherwomen to meet the Fig. 5.3 Sheep rearing   an important income augmenting activity in rural areas working capital requirements for Horticulture: Blessed with a varying climate and soil conditions, India has adopted growing of diverse horti- cultural crops such as fruits, vegetables, tuber crops, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, spices and plantation crops. These crops play a vital role in providing food and employment concerns. Horticulture sector contributes nearly one-third of the value of agriculture output and six per cent of Gross Domestic Product of India. India has emerged as a world leader in producing a variety of fruits like mangoes, bananas, coconuts, cashew nuts and a number of spices and is the second largest producer of fruits and vegetables.  Economic condition of many farmers engaged in horticulture has improved and it has become a means of improving livelihood for many unprivileged classes. Flower harvesting, nursery maintenance, hybrid seed production and tissue culture, propagation of fruits and flowers and  food processing are highly remunerative employment options for women in rural areas. Though, in terms of numbers, our impressive but its productivity is quite low as compared to other countries. It requires improved technology and promotion of good breeds of animals to enhance productivity. Improved veterinary care and credit facilities to small and marginal farmers and landless labourers would livelihood options through Production of fisheries has related to over- fishing and pollution need to be regulated Fig. 5.5 Women in rural households take up bee- keeping as an entrepreneurial activity Fig. 5.4 Poultry has the largest share of total livestock in India INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and controlled. Welfare programmes for the fishing community have to be reoriented in a manner which can provide long-term gains and sustenance of livelihoods. Horticulture has emerged as a successful sustainable livelihood option and needs to be encouraged significantly. Enhancing its role requires investment in infrastructure like electricity, cold storage systems, marketing linkages, small-scale processing units and technology improvement and dissemination. Other Alternate Livelihood Options: The IT has revolutionised many sectors in the Indian economy. There is broad consensus that IT can play a critical role in achieving sustainable development and food security in the twenty-first century. Governments can predict areas of food insecurity and vulnerability using appropriate information and software tools so that action can be taken to prevent or reduce the likelihood of an emergency. It also has  a positive impact on the agriculture sector as it can disseminate information regarding emerging technologies and its applications, prices, weather and soil conditions for growing different crops etc. Though IT is, by itself, no catalyst of change but it can act as a tool for releasing the creative potential and knowledge embedded in the society. It also has potential of employment generation in rural areas. Experiments with IT and its application to rural development are carried out in different parts of India. 5.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND In recent years, awareness of the harmful effect of chemical-based fertilisers and pesticides on our health is on a rise. Conventional agriculture relies heavily on chemical fertilisers and toxic pesticides etc., which enter the food supply, penetrate the water sources, harm the livestock, deplete the soil and devastate natural eco-systems. Efforts in evolving technologies which are eco-friendly are essential for sustainable development and one such technology which is eco-friendly is organic farming. In short, organic agriculture is a whole system of Box 5.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education. Source: www.pib.nic.in accessed on 24 October 2014. farming that restores, maintains and enhances the ecological balance. There is an increasing demand for organically grown food to enhance food safety throughout the world (see Benefits of Organic Farming: Organic agriculture offers a means to substitute costlier agricultural inputs (such as HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers, pesticides etc.) with locally produced organic inputs that are cheaper and thereby generate good returns on investment. Organic agriculture also generates income through exports as the demand for organically grown crops is on a rise. Studies across countries have shown that organically grown food has more nutritional value than chemical farming thus providing us with healthy foods. Since organic farming requires more labour input than conventional farming, India will find organic farming an attractive proposition. Finally, the produce is pesticide-free and produced in an environmentally sustainable way (see Popularising organic farming requires awareness and willingness on the part of farmers to adapt to new technology. Inadequate infrastructure and the problem of marketing the products are major concerns which need to be addressed apart from an Box 5.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton, the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously remarked,  Do you want India to go naked?   At present, as many as 130 farmers have committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement s standards.  The produce was later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO, and found to be of high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of Indian farmers are marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but accounting for 20 per cent of India s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic agriculture is more profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the long run. Visit a farm in your locality which uses organic manure and discuss the uses associated with the farming practices. Present the report in your class. Source: Lyla Bavadam, A Green Alternative, Frontline, 29 July 2005. Box 5.4: Organic Food Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are many retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status to sell organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around 10-100 per cent than conventional ones. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT appropriate agriculture policy to promote organic farming. It has been observed that the yields from organic farming are less than modern agricultural farming in the initial years. Therefore, small and marginal farmers may find it difficult to adapt to large- scale production. Organic produce may also have more blemishes and a shorter shelf life than sprayed produce. Moreover choice in production of off-season crops is quite limited in organic farming. Nevertheless, organic farming helps in sustainable development of agriculture and India has a clear advantage in producing organic products for both domestic and international markets. Do you think food and non-food items cultivated using organic farming methods will be It is clear that until and unless some spectacular changes occur, the rural sector might continue to remain backward. There is a greater need today to make rural areas more vibrant through diversification into vegetables and fruits and linking up the rural production centres with the urban and foreign (export) markets to realise higher returns on the investments for the products. Moreover, infrastructure elements like credit and marketing, farmer- friendly agricultural policies and a constant appraisal and dialogue between farmers  groups and state agricultural departments are essential to realise the full potential of the sector. Today we cannot look at the environment and rural development as two distinct subjects. There is need to invent or procure alternate sets of eco- friendly technologies that lead to sustainable development in different circumstances. From these, each rural Work These Out   Make a list of five popular items that are organically produced in India.   Visit a nearby super market, vegetable shop and/or a departmental shop. Identify a few products. Prepare a chart comparing a few goods that are produced organically and in the normal way on the basis of their prices, shelf life, quality and the kind of advertisement through which they are   Visit a horticultural farm in the nearby locality. Collect the details of goods that they cultivate on the farm. They could have diversified their cropping patterns. Discuss with them the merits and demerits of the community can choose whatever will suit its purpose. We need to learn from, and also try out when found relevant, practices from the available set of  best practice  illustrations (which means success stories of rural development experiments that have already been carried out in similar conditions in different parts of India), to speed up this process of  learning What do you mean by rural development? Bring out the key issues in Discuss the importance of credit in rural development. Explain the role of micro-credit in meeting credit requirements of the Explain the steps taken by the government in developing rural Why is agricultural diversification essential for sustainable Critically evaluate the role of the rural banking system in the process of rural development in India.   Rural development is quite a comprehensive term but it essentially means a plan of action for the development of rural areas which are lagging behind in socio-economic development.   There is a need for improving the quantity and quality of infrastructure in rural areas such as banking, marketing, storage, transport and communications etc. to realise its true potential.   Diversification towards new areas such as livestock, fisheries and other non-agricultural activities is necessary not only to reduce the risk from agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood options to our rural people.   The importance of organic farming as an environmentally sustainable production process is on a rise and needs to be promoted. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT What do you mean by agricultural marketing? Mention some obstacles that hinder the mechanism of agricultural What are the alternative channels available for agricultural marketing? Give some examples. Distinguish between  Green Revolution  and  Golden Revolution. Do you think various measures taken by the government to improve agricultural marketing are sufficient? Discuss. Explain the role of non-farm employment in promoting rural Bring out the importance of animal husbandry, fisheries and horticulture as a source of diversification.  Information technology plays a very significant role in achieving sustainable development and food security    comment. What is organic farming and how does it promote sustainable Identify the benefits and limitations of organic farming. Enlist some problems faced by farmers during the initial years of  Jan-Dhan-Yojna helps in the rural development.  Do you agree with this statement? Explain. ACHARYA, S.S. 2004. Agricultural Marketing, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. ALAGH, Y.K. 2004. State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study    an Overview. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. CHAWLA, N.K., M.P.G. KURUP and V. P. SHARMA. 2004. Animal Husbandry, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. DEHADRAI, P.V.  and Y.S. YADAV. 2004. Fisheries Development, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. JALAN, BIMAL. (Ed.). 1992. The Indian Economy: Problems and Perspectives. Penguin Publication, New Delhi. NARAYANAN, S. 2005. Organic Farming in India. NABARD Occasional Paper No: 38, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai. SINGH, H.P., P.P. DUTTA and M. SUDHA. 2004. Horticulture Development, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. SINGH, SURJIT  and VIDYA SAGAR. 2004. Agricultural Credit in India: State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. SINHA, V.K. 1998. Challenges in Rural Development. Discovery Publishing House, New Delhi. TODARO, MICHAEL P. 1987. Economic Development in the Third World. Orient Longman Ltd, Hyderabad. TOPPO, E. 2004. Organic Vegetable Gardening: Grow Your Own Vegetables. Unit for Labour Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai. Successful Governance Initiatives and Best Practices: Experiences from Indian States, Government of India in Coordination with Human Resource Development Centre and UNDP, Planning Commission, Delhi, 2002. Annual Reports, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, New Basic Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Statistics ( for various years), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers  Welfare, Government of India. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will understand a few basic concepts relating to employment such as economic activity, worker, workforce and unemployment understand the nature of participation of men and women in various economic activities in various sectors know the nature and extent of unemployment assess the initiatives taken by the government in generating employment opportunities in various sectors and regions. EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, AND OTHER ISSUES EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES People do a variety of work. Some work on farms, in factories, banks, workplaces; yet a few others work at home. Work at home includes not only traditional work like weaving, lace making or variety of handicrafts but also modern jobs like programming work in the IT industry. Earlier factory work meant working in factories located in cities whereas now technology has enabled people to produce those factory-based goods at home in villages. During Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 21, millions of workers delivered their products and services through work-from-home. Why do people work? Work plays an important role in our lives as individuals and as members of society. People work for  earning  a living. Some people get, or have, money by inheriting it, not working for it. This does not completely satisfy anybody. Being employed in work gives us a sense of self-worth and enables us to relate ourselves meaningfully with others. Every working person is actively contributing to national income and hence, the development of the country by engaging in various economic activities   that is the real meaning of  earning  a living. We do not work only for ourselves; we also have a sense of accomplishment when we work to meet the requirements of those who are dependent on us. Having recognised the  importance of work, Mahatma Gandhi insisted upon education and training through a variety of works Studying about working people gives us insights into the quality and nature of employment in a country and helps in understanding and planning our human resources. It helps us to analyse the contribution made by different industries and sectors towards national income. It also helps us to address many social issues such as exploitation of marginalised sections of the society, child labour, etc. What I object to, is the  craze  for machinery, not machinery as such. The craze is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on  saving labour  till thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of Fig. 6.1 Multinational companies sell footballs made in the houses of Jalandhar, Punjab INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 6.2 WORKERS  AND EMPLOYMENT What is employment? Who is a worker? When a farmer works on fields, he or she produces food grains and raw materials for industries. Cotton becomes cloth in textile mills and in powerlooms. Lorries transport goods from one place to another. We know that the total money value of all such final goods and services produced in a country in a year is called its gross domestic product for that year. When we also consider what we pay for our imports and get from our exports we find that there is a net earning for the country which may be positive (if we have exported more in value terms than imported) or negative (if imports exceeded exports in value terms) or zero (if exports and imports were of the same value). When we add this earning (plus or minus) from foreign transactions, what we get is called the country s gross national product for that year. Those activities which contribute to the gross national product are called economic activities. All those who are engaged in economic activities, in whatever capacity   high or low, are workers. Even if some of them temporarily abstain from work due to illness, injury or other physical, bad weather, festivals, social or religious functions, they are also workers.  Workers also include all those who help the main workers in these activities. We generally think of only those who are paid by an employer for their work as workers. This is not so. Those who are self-employed are also The nature of employment in India is multifaceted. Some get employment throughout the year; some others get employed for only a few months in a year. Many workers do not get fair wages for their work. While estimating the number of workers, all those who are engaged in economic activities are included as employed. Y ou might be interested in knowing the number of people actively engaged in various economic activities. During 2022- India had about a 545 million strong workforce. Since majority of our people reside in rural areas, the proportion of workforce residing there is higher. The Work This Out neighbourhood, you might come across many women who, even though they have technical degrees and diplomas and also free time to go to work, do not go to work. Ask them the reasons for not going to work. List all of them and discuss in the classroom whether they should go for work and why, and also ways by which they could be sent for work.  Some social scientists argue that housewives working at home without getting paid for that work must also be regarded as contributing to the gross national product and therefore, as engaged in an economic activity. Would you agree? EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES rural workers constitute about two- thirds of this 471 million. Men form the majority of workforce in India. About 77 per cent of the workers are men and the rest are women (men and women include child labourers in respective sexes). Women workers account for one-fourth of the rural workforce whereas in urban areas, they are just one-fifth of the workforce. Women carry out works like cooking, fetching water and fuelwood and participate in farm labour. They are not paid wages in cash or in the form of grains; at times they are not paid at all. For this reason, these women are not categorised as workers. Economists argue that these women should also be called workers. What do you think? 6.3 PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE IN -population ratio is an indicator which is used for analysing the employment situation in the country. This ratio is useful in knowing the proportion of population that is actively contributing to the production of goods and services of a country. If the ratio is higher, it means that the engagement of people is greater; if the ratio for a country is medium, or low, it means that a very high proportion of its population is not involved directly in economic activities. You might have already studied, in lower classes, the meaning of the term  population. Population is defined as the total number of people who reside in a particular locality at a particular point of time. If you want to know the worker-population ratio for India, divide the total number of workers in India by the population in India and multiply it by 100, you will get the worker-population ratio for If you look at Table 6.1, it shows the different levels of participation of people in economic activities. For every 100 persons, about 41 (by rounding off 41.1) are workers in India. In urban areas, the proportion is about 38, whereas in rural India, the ratio is about 42. Why is there such a difference? People in rural areas have limited resources to earn a higher income and participate more in the employment market. Many do not go to schools, colleges and other training institutions. Even if some go, they discontinue in the middle to join the workforce; whereas, in urban areas, a considerable section is able to study in various educational institutions. Urban people have a variety of employment opportunities. They look for the appropriate job to suit their qualifications and skills. In rural areas, people cannot stay at home as their economic condition may not allow them to do so. Worker-Population Ratio in India, INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Compared to females, more males are found to be working. The difference in participation rates is very large in urban areas: for every 100 urban females, only about 19 are engaged in some economic activities. In rural areas, for every 100 rural women about 30 participate in the employment market. Why are women, in general, and urban women, in common to find that where men are able taking up jobs. Going back to what has already done by women are not  recognised as This narrow defini- tion of work leads to non-recognition s work and, therefore, to the underestimation of the number of women workers in the country of the women actively engaged in many activities within the house and at family farms who are not paid for such work. As they certainly contribute to the maintenance of the household and farms, do you think that their number should be added to the number of 6.4 SELF-EMPLOYED AND HIRED Does the worker -population ratio say anything about workers  status in society or about the working conditions? By knowing the status with which a worker is placed in an enterprise, it may be possible to know one dimension   quality of employment in a country. It also Fig. 6.2 Brick-making: a form of casual work Work These Out   Any study of employment must start with a review of the worker-population ratios   why?   In some communities, you might have noticed that even if the males do not earn a high income, they do not send women to work. EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES enables us to know the attachment a worker has with his or her job and the authority she or he has over the enterprise and over other co-workers. Let us take three workers from the construction industry   a cement shop owner, a construction worker and a civil engineer of a construction. Since the status of each one of them is different from another, they are also who own and operate an enterprise to earn their livelihood are known as self-employed. Thus the cement shop owner is self-employed. About 57 per cent workforce in India belongs to this. The construction workers are known as casual wage labourers; they account for about 22 per cent of India s labourers are casually engaged in others  farms and, in return,  get a remuneration for the work done. Workers like account for 21 per cent When  a worker is engaged by someone or an enterprise and paid his or her wages on a regular basis, they are known as regular salaried employees (see table 6.3). Look at Chart 6.1  you will notice that self-employment is a major source of livelihood for both men and women as this category accounts for more than 50 per cent of the workforce. Casual wage work is the second major source for women. When it comes to regular Chart 6.1: Distribution of Employment Casual Wage Labourers Regular Salaried Employees Chart 6.2: Distribution of Employment by Region Casual Wage Labourers Regular Salaried Employees INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT salaried jobs are greater. In rural areas, since majority of those depending on farming own plots of land and cultivate independently, the share of self- employed is greater. The nature of work in urban areas is different. Obviously everyone cannot run factories, shops and offices of various types. Moreover enterprises in urban areas require workers on a salaried employment, men are found to be so engaged in greater proportion. Men form 24 per cent whereas women form 17 per cent. The gap between men and women is very less. When we compare the distribution of workforce in rural and urban areas in Chart 6.2 you will notice that the self-employed are found more in rural areas than in urban areas. In the latter, both self-employment and regular wage Work These Out   We generally think that only those who are doing paid work regularly or casually such as agricultural labourers, factory workers, those who work in banks and other offices as assistants and clerks are workers. From the above discussion, you must have understood that those who are self- employed such as pavement vegetable vendors, professionals such as lawyers, doctors and engineers are also workers.  Mark (a), (b) and (c) against self-employed, regular salaried employees and casual wage Owner of a saloon Worker in a rice mill who is paid on daily basis but employed regularly Cashier in State Bank of India Typist working in a state government office on a daily wage basis but A handloom weaver Loading worker in wholesale vegetable shop Owner of a cold drinks shop which sells Pepsi, Coca Cola and Mirinda Nurse in a private hospital who gets monthly salary and has been work- ing regularly for the past 5 years.   Economists point out that casual wage labourers are the most vulnerable among the three categories. Could you locate who these workers are and where they are found and why?   Can we say that the self-employed earn more than the casual wage labourers or regular salaried employees? Identify a few other indicators of quality of EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES 6.5 EMPLOYMENT IN of a country, labour flows from agriculture activities to industry and services. In this process, workers migrate from rural to urban areas., at a much later stage, the industrial sector begins to lose its share of total employment as the service sector enters a period of rapid expansion. This shift can be understood by looking at the distribution of workers by industry, we divide all economic activities into eight different industrial divisions. They are (i) Agriculture (ii) Manufacturing (iv) Electricity, Gas and Water Supply (v) Construction (vi) Trade (vii) Transport and Storage and (viii) Services. For simplicity, all the working persons engaged in these divisions can be clubbed into three major sectors viz., (a) primary sector which includes (i) and (ii), (b) secondary sector which includes (iii), (iv) and (v) and (c) service sector which includes divisions (vi), (vii) and (viii). Table 6.2 shows the distribution of working persons in different industries during the year 2022- Primary sector is the main source of employment for majority of workers Distribution of Workforce by Industry, 2022-2023 Place of Residence Tertiary/ Service Sector Fig. 6.3 Garment workers: upcoming factory employment for women INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT in India. Secondary sector provides employment to only about 25 per cent of workforce. About 29 per cent of workers are in the service sector 6.2 also shows that about 60 per cent of the workforce in rural India depends on agriculture, forestry and fishing. About 23 per cent of rural workers are working in manufacturing industries, construction and other industrial activities. Service sector provides employment to about 20 per cent of rural workers. Agriculture is not a major source of employment in urban areas where people  are mainly engaged in the service sector. About 60 per cent of urban workers are in the service sector. The secondary sector gives employment to about one-third of Though both men and women workers are concentrated in the primary sector, women workers  concentration is very high there. About 64 per cent of the  female workforce is employed in the primary sector whereas 38 percent of males work in that sector. Men get opportunities in both secondary and service sectors. STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENT In Chapters 2 and 3, you might have studied about the planning strategies in detail. Here we will look at two developmental indicators   growth of employment and GDP. Nearly seventy years of planned development have been aimed at expansion of the economy through increase in national output and employment. During the period 1950 2010, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India grew positively and was higher than the employment growth. However, there was always fluctuation in the growth of GDP. During this period, employment grew at the rate of not more than 2 per cent. Chart 6.3 also points at another disheartening development in the late 1990s: employment growth started declining and reached the level of growth that India had in the early stages of planning. During these years, we also find a widening gap between the growth of GDP and employment. This means that in the, without generating employment, we have been able to Work This Out   All newspapers have one section meant for job opportunities. Some also devote an entire supplement in a day or every week like Opportunities in The Hindu or Ascent in The Times of India. Many companies advertise vacancies for various positions. Cut those sections. Develop a table which contains four columns: whether the company is private or public, name of the post, number of posts, sector   primary, secondary or tertiary   and qualification required. Analyse the table in the classroom about jobs advertised in the newspapers. EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES produce more goods and services. Scholars refer to this phenomenon as is necessary to know how the growth pattern of employment and GDP From this we will also be able to Let us look at two indicators that we have seen in the preceding sections   employment of people in various industries and their status. We know that India is an agrarian nation; a major section of population lives in rural areas and is dependent on agriculture as their main livelihood. Developmental strategies in many countries, including India, have aimed at reducing the proportion of people depending on agriculture. Distribution of workforce by industrial sectors shows substantial shift from farm work to non-farm work (see Table 6.3). In 1972-73, about 74 per cent of workforce was engaged in primary sector and in 2022- proportion has declined to about 46 per cent. Secondary and service sectors are showing promising future for the Indian workforce. Y notice that the shares of these sectors have increased from 11 to 25 per cent and 15 to 29 per cent, respectively The distribution of workforce in different status indicates that over the Chart 6.3: Growth of Employment and Gross Domestic Product, 1951 2023 (%) Note: *This is the period for which comparable and authentic data are available. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT last five decades (1972- have moved from self-employment and regular salaried employment to casual wage work. Yet self-employment continues to be the major employment. Look at the last column of table 6.3. How do you understand the stagnation of secondary sector and moderate rise in self-employement 23? Discuss in the class. Scholars call the process of moving from self-employment and regular salaried employment to casual wage work as casualisation of workforce. This makes the workers highly vulnerable. How? Look at the case study of Ahmedabad in the preceding In the mean time you also notice 23 a moderate rise in the share of regular salaried employees. How do you explain this phenomenon? Regular Salaried Employees Casual Wage Labourers Trends in Employment Pattern (Sector-wise and Status-wise), 1972-2023 (in %) Work These Out  Do you know that maintaining employment growth at 2 per cent for a country like India is not an easy thing? Why?   What will happen if there is no additional employment generated in the economy even though we are able to produce goods and services in the economy? How could jobless growth happen?   Economists say that if casualisation increases the earning of the people, such phenomenon should be welcomed. Suppose a marginal farmer becomes a full-time, do you think he will be happy even if he earns more in his daily wage work? Or will a permanent and regular worker of the pharmaceutical industry be happy if he  becomes a daily wage labourer, even if his or her overall earnings increase? Discuss in the classroom. EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES 6.7 INFORMALISATION OF INDIAN In the previous section we have found that the proportion of hired work jobs - working for others has been increasing. One of the objectives of development planning in India, since India s independence, has been to provide decent livelihood to its people. It has been envisaged that the industrialisation strategy would bring surplus workers from agriculture to industry with better standard of living as in developed countries. We have seen in the preceding section,  that even after 70 years of planned development, more than half of the Indian workforce depends on farming as the major source of livelihood. Economists argue that, over the years, the quality of employment has been deteriorating. Even after working for more than 10-20 years, why do some workers not get maternity benefit, provident fund, gratuity and pension? Why does a person working in the private sector get a  lower salary as compared to another person doing the same work but in the public sector? You may find that a small section of Indian workforce is getting regular income. The government, through its labour laws, enable them to protect their rights in various ways. This section of the workforce forms trade unions, bargains with employers for better wages and other social security measures. Who are they? To know this we classify workforce into two categories: workers in formal and informal sectors, which are also referred to as organised and unorganised sectors. All the public sector establishments and those private sector establishments  which employ 10 hired workers or more are called formal sector establishments and those who work in such establishments are formal sector workers. All other enterprises and workers working in those enterprises form the informal sector. Thus, informal sector includes millions of farmers, agricultural labourers, owners of small enterprises and people working in those enterprises as also the self-employed who do not have any hired workers. It also includes all non- farm casual wage labourers who work for more than one employer such as construction workers and headload workers. You may note that this is one of the ways of classifying workers. There could be other ways of classification as well. Discuss the possible ways in the class. Box 6.1: Formal Sector Employment The information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by the Union Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts of the country. Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector in India? In 2012, out of about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 million workers were employed by the public sector.  Here also men form the majority, as women constitute only about one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economists point out that the reform process initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline in the number of workers employed in the formal sector.  What do you think? INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Those who are working in the formal sector enjoy social security benefits. They earn more than those in the informal sector. Developmental planning envisaged that as the economy grows, more and more workers would become formal sector workers and the proportion of workers engaged in the informal sector would dwindle. But what has happened in India? Look at the following chart workforce in formal and informal sectors. We learnt that in 2011-12 there were about 473 million workers in India. There were about 30 million workers in the formal sector. Can you estimate the percentage of people employed in the formal sectors in the country? About only six per cent (30/473 100)! Thus, the rest 94 per cent are in the informal sector. In 2011-12, the year for which gender wise data on formal-informal sector employment is available (Chart 6.4), about 20 per cent of formal sector and 30 per cent of informal sector workers are women. Fig. 6.4 Road side vending: an increasing variety of informal sector employment Chart 6.4: Workers in Formal and Informal Sector, 2011-12 EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES Box 6.2: Informalisation in Ahmedabad Ahmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of more than 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them. These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degree of income security. They had secure jobs with a living wage; they were covered by social security schemes protecting their health and old age. They had a strong trade union which not only disputes but also ran activities for the welfare of workers and their families. In the early 1980s, textile mills all over the country began to close down. In some places, such as Mumbai, the mills closed rapidly. In Ahmedabad, the process of closure was long drawn out and spread over 10 years. Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000 non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector. The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholism and suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work. Source: Renana Jhabvala, Ratna M. Sudarshan and Jeemol Unni  (Ed.) Informal Economy at Centre Stage: New Structures of Employment, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 2003, pp.265. Since the late 1970s, many developing countries, including India, started paying attention to enterprises and workers in the informal sector as employment in the formal sector is not growing. Workers and enterprises in the informal sector do not get regular income; they do not have any protection or regulation from the government. Workers are dismissed Technology used in the informal sector enterprises is outdated; they also do not maintain any accounts. Workers of this sector live in slums and are squatters. Of late, owing to the efforts of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the Indian government has Change in the balance of power  in a house: an unemployed mill worker peeling garlic whereas his wife has a new job of beedi rolling. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT initiated the modernisation of informal sector enterprises and provision of social security measures to informal You might have seen people looking for jobs in newspapers. Some look for a job  through friends and relatives. In many cities, you might find people standing in some select areas looking for people to employ them for that day s work. Some go to factories and offices and give their bio-data and ask whether there is any vacancy in their factory or office. Many in the rural areas do not go out and ask for a job but stay home when there is no work. Some go to Work These Out Tick ( ) mark against those which are in the informal sector   Worker in a hotel which has seven hired workers and three family workers   A private school teacher in a school which has 25 teachers   A police constable   Nurse in a government hospital   Cycle-rickshaw puller   The owner of a textile shop employing  nine workers   Driver of a bus company which has more than 10 buses with 20 drivers, conductors and other workers   Civil engineer working in a construction company which has 10 workers   Computer operator in the state government office working on a temporary   A clerk in the electricity office. Fig. 6.5 Unemployed mill workers waiting for casual jobs EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES employment exchanges and register themselves for vacancies notified through employment exchanges. The National Statistical Office (Previously it was known as National Sample Survey Organisation) defines unemployment as a situation in which all those who, owing to lack of work, are not working but either seek work through employment exchanges, intermediaries, friends or relatives or by making applications to prospective employers or express their willingness or availability for work under the prevailing condition of work and remunerations. There are a variety of ways by which an unemployed person is identified. Economists define unemployed person as one who is not able to get employment of even one hour in half a day. There are three sources of data on unemployment: Reports of Census of India, National Statistical Office s Unemployment Situation, Annual Reports of Periodic Labour Force Survey, and Directorate General of Employment and Training data of Registration with different estimates of unemployment, they do variety of unemployment prevailing in our country. Do we have different types of unemployment in our economy? The situation described in the first paragraph of this section is called open unemployment. Economists call unemployment prevailing in Indian farms as disguised unemployment. What is disguised unemployment? Suppose a farmer has four acres of land and he actually needs only two workers and himself to carry out various operations on his farm in a year, but if he employs five workers and his family members such as his wife and children, this situation is known as disguised unemployment. One study conducted in the late 1950s showed about one-third of agriculture workers in India as You may have noticed that many people migrate to an urban area, pick up a job and stay there for some time, but come back to their home villages as soon as the rainy season begins. Why do they do so? This is because work in agriculture is seasonal; there are no employment opportunities in the village for all months in the year. When there is no work to do on farms, people go to urban areas and look for jobs. Fig. 6.6 Sugar cane cutters: disguised unemployment is common in farm works INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT This kind of unemployment is known as seasonal unemployment. This is also a common form of unemployment prevailing in India. Though we have witnessed slow growth of employment, have you seen people being unemployed over a very long time? Scholars say that in India, people  cannot remain  completely unemployed for very long because their desperate economic condition would not allow them to be so. You will rather find them being forced to accept jobs that nobody else would do, unpleasant or even dangerous jobs in unclean, or unhealthy surroundings. The Central and State governments take  initiatives and generate employment to facilitate a decent living for low income families through various measures. These will be discussed in the following section. 6.9 GOVERNMENT AND the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005. It promises 100 days of guaranteed wage employment to all rural households who volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The scheme based on this Act is one of the government has implemented to generate employment for those who are in need of jobs in rural areas. Since Independence, the Union and State governments have played an important role in generating employment or creating opportunities for employment generation. Their efforts can be broadly categorised into two   direct and indirect. In the first category, as you have seen in the preceding section, the government employs people in various departments for administrative purposes. It also runs industries, hotels and transport companies, and hence, provides employment directly to workers. When the output government enterprises increases, then private enterprises which receive raw materials from government enterprises will also raise their output and hence increase the number of employment opportunities in the economy. For example, when a government owned Fig. 6.7 Dam construction work is a direct way of employment generation by the government EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES steel company increases its output, it will result in direct increase in employment in that government company. Simultaneously, private companies, which purchase steel from it, will also increase their output and thus  employment. This is the indirect opportunities by the government initiatives in the economy. Many programmes that the governments implement, aimed at alleviating poverty, are through employment generation. They are generation programmes. All these programmes aim at providing not only employment but also services in areas such as primary health, primary education,  rural drinking water, nutrition, assistance for people to buy income and employment generating assets, development of community assets by generating wage employment, construction of houses and sanitation, assistance for constructing houses, laying of rural roads, development of wastelands/ There has been a change in the structure of workforce in India. Newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the service sector. The expansion of the service sector and the advent of high technology now frequently permit a highly competitive existence for efficient small scale and often individual enterprises or specialist workers side by side with the multinationals. Outsourcing of work is becoming a common practice. It means that a big firm finds it profitable to close departments (for example, legal or computer programming or customer service sections) and hand over a large number of small piecemeal jobs to very small enterprises or specialist individuals, sometimes situated even in other countries. The traditional notion of the modern factory or office, as a result, has been altered in such a manner that for many the home is becoming the workplace. All of this change has not gone in favour of the individual worker. The nature of employment has become more informal with only limited availability of social security measures to the In the last few decades, there has been rapid growth in the gross domestic product, but without simultaneous increase in  employment opportunities. This has forced the government to take up initiatives in generating employment opportunities particularly in the rural areas. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Who is a worker? Define worker-population ratio. Are the following workers   a beggar, a thief, a smuggler, a gambler?   All those persons who are engaged in various economic activities and hence contribute to gross national product are workers.   About two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various   Men particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.   Majority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the proportion of India s workforce.   About three-fifth of India s workforce depends on agriculture and other allied activities as the major source of livelihood.   In recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.   During post-reform period, India has been witness to employment opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly in the informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.   Government is the major formal sector employer in the country.   Disguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in rural   There has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.   Through various schemes and policies, the government takes initiatives to generate employment directly and indirectly. EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES Find the odd man out (i) owner of a saloon (ii) a cobbler (iii) a cashier in Mother Dairy or Milk Cooperative Society of your area (iv)  a tuition master (v) transport operator (vi) construction worker. The newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the An establishement with four hired workers is known as (formal/informal) sector establishment. Raj is going to school. When he is not in school, you will find him working in his farm. Can you consider him as a worker? Why? Compared to urban women, more rural women are found working. Meena is a housewife. Besides taking care of household chores, she works in the cloth shop which is owned and operated by her husband. Can she be considered as a worker? Why? Find the odd man out (i) rickshaw puller who works under a rick- shaw owner (ii) mason (iii) mechanic shop worker (iv) shoeshine boy. The following table shows distribution of workforce in India for the year 1972-73. Analyse it and give reasons for the nature of workforce distribution. You will notice that the data is pertaining to the situation in India about 50 years ago! Place of Residence Workforce (in millions) The following table shows the population and worker population ratio for India in 1999-2000. Can you estimate the workforce (urban and total) for India? No. of Workers 71.88   41.9 = 30.12 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Why are regular salaried employees more in urban areas than in Why are less women found in regular salaried employment? Analyse the recent trends in sectoral distribution of workforce in India. Compared to the 1970s, there has hardly been any change in the distribution of workforce across various industries. Comment. Do you think that during 1950-2010 employment generated in the country is commensurate with the growth of GDP in India? How? 18.   Is it necessary to generate employment in the formal sector rather than in the informal sector? Why? Victor is able to get work only for two hours in a day. Rest of the day, he is looking for work. Is he unemployed? Why? What kind of jobs could persons like Victor be doing? You are residing in a village. If you are asked to advice the village panchayat, what kinds of activities would you suggest for the improvement of your village which would also generate employment. Who is  a casual wage labourer? How will you know whether a worker is working in the informal sector? Select a region, say a street or colony, and divide it into 3-4 sub-regions. Conduct a survey by which you can collect the details of activity each person living there is engaged in. Derive the worker-population ratio for all the regions. Interpret the results for differences in worker-population ratio for the different sub-regions. Suppose 3-4 groups of students are given different regions of a state. One region is mainly engaged in cultivation of paddy. In another region, coconut is the main plantation. The third region is a coastal region where fishing is the main activity. The fourth region has a river nearby with a lot of livestock rearing activities. Ask all the four groups to develop a report on what kind of employment could be generated in the four regions. Visit the local library and ask for Employment News, a weekly published by the Government of India. Go through each issue for the last two months. There will be seven issues. Select 25 advertisements and SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES fill in the following table (expand the table as needed). Discuss the nature of jobs in the classroom. Advertisement 1       Advertisement 2 Name of Office Name of the post Number of posts/vacancies You might notice, in your locality, a variety of works being done by the  government, for example laying of roads, desilting of tanks, construction of school buildings, hospital and other government offices, construction of check dams and houses for the poor etc. Prepare a critical assessment report on one such activity. The issues covered could be the following (i) how the work was identified (ii) amount sanctioned (iii) contribution of local people, if any (iv) number of persons involved   both men and women (v) wages paid (vi) is it really required in that area and other critical comments on the implementation of the scheme under which the work is being carried In recent years, you may have noticed that many voluntary organisations also take initiatives to generate employment in hilly and dry land regions. If you find such initiatives in your locality, visit and prepare a report. CHADHA, G.K. and P.P. SAHU, 2002.  Post-reform Setbacks in Rural Employment: Issues that need further scrutiny.  Economic and Political Weekly, May DESAI, S and M.B.DAS. 2004.  Is Employment Driving India s Growth Surge, Economic and Political Weekly, July 3, pp. 3045-3051. GHOSE, AJIT K. 1999.  Current Issues of Employment Policy in India.  Economic and Political Weekly, September 4, pp. 2592-2608. HIRWAY, INDIRA. 2002.  Employment and Unemployment Situation in 1990s: How Good are NSS Data.  Economic and Political Weekly, May 25, INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT JACOB, PAUL. 1986.  Concept of  work  and estimates of  workforce    An appraisal of the treatment of activities relating to non-marketed output,  Sarvekshana, Vol.IX, No.4, April. KULSHRESHTHA, A.C., GULAB SINGH, ALOK KAR and R.L. MISHRA. 2000.  Workforce in the Indian National Accounts Statistics,  The Journal of Income and Wealth, Vol.22, No.2, July, pp. 3-39. PRADHAN, B.K. and M.R.SALUJA. 1996.  Labour Statistics in India: A Review.  Margin, July- September, Vol.28, Number 4, pp. 319-347. RATH, NILAKANTHA. 2001.  Data on Employment, Unemployment and Education: Where to go from here?  Economic and Political Weekly, June 9, SUNDARAM, K. 2001.  Employment-Unemployment Situation in the Nineties: Some Results from NSS 55th Round Survey, Economic and Political Weekly, March 17, pp. 931-940. SUNDARAM, K. 2001.  Employment and Poverty in 1990s: Further Results from NSS 55th Round Employment-Unemployment Survey, 1999-2000,  Economic and Political Weekly, August 11, pp. 3039-3049. VISARIA, PRAVIN. 1996.  Structure of the Indian Workforce, 1961-1994,  The Indian Journal of Labour Economics, Vol.39, No.4, pp. 725-740. Annual Reports, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Delhi. Census of India 2011, Primary Census Abstract, Registrar General of Census Operations, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Delhi. Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Reports on Employment and Unemployment Situation in India, Ministry of Statistics and Planning, Government of India. Annual Report of Periodic Labour Force Survey 2017-18, National Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India, New Delhi. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will understand the concept of environment analyse the causes and effects of  environmental degradation  and  resource understand the nature of environmental challenges facing India relate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT In the earlier chapters we have discussed the main economic issues faced by the Indian economy. The economic development that we have achieved so far has come at a very heavy price   at the cost of environmental quality. As we step into an era of globalisation that promises higher economic growth, we have to bear in mind the adverse consequences of the past developmental path on our environment and consciously choose a path of sustainable development. To understand the unsustainable path of development that we have taken and the challenges of sustainable development, we have to first understand the significance and contribution of environment to economic development. With this in mind, this chapter is divided into three sections. The first part deals with the functions and role of environment. The second section discusses the state of India s environment and the third section deals with steps and strategies to achieve sustainable development. 7.2  ENVIRONMENT   DEFINITION AND Environment is defined as the total planetary inheritance and the totality of all resources. It includes all the biotic and abiotic factors that influence each other. While all living elements  the birds, animals and plants, forests, fisheries etc. are biotic elements, abiotic elements include air, water, land etc. Rocks and sunlight are examples of abiotic elements of the environment. A study of the environment then calls for a study of the inter-relationship between these biotic and abiotic components of the environment. Functions of the Environment: The environment performs four vital functions (i) it supplies resources: resources here include both renewable and non-renewable resources. Renewable resources are those which can be used without the possibility of the resource becoming depleted or exhausted. That is, a continuous supply of the resource remains available. Examples of renewable resources are the trees in the forests and the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable resources, on the other hand, are those which get exhausted with extraction and use,  for example, fossil fuel (ii) it assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and (iv) it also provides aesthetic services like scenery etc. The environment is able to perform these functions without any interruption as long as the demand on these The environment, left to itself, can continue to support life for millions of years. The single most unstable and potentially disruptive element in the scheme is the human species. Human beings, with modern technology, have the capacity to bring about, intentionally or unintentionally, far-reaching and irreversible changes in the enviornment. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Work These Out   Why has water become an economic commodity? Discuss.   Fill in the following table with some common types of diseases and illnesses that are caused due to air, water and noise pollution. functions is within its carrying capacity. This implies that the resource extraction is not above the rate of regeneration of the resource and the wastes generated are within the environment. When this is not so, the environment fails to perform its third and vital function of life sustenance and environmental crisis. This is the situation today all over the world. The rising population of the developing countries and the affluent consumption and production standards of the developed world have placed a huge stress on the environment in terms of its first two functions. Many resources have become extinct and the wastes generated are beyond the absorptive capacity of the capacity means the ability of the environment to absorb degradation. The result   we are today at the threshold of environmental crisis. The past development has polluted and dried up rivers and other aquifers making water an economic good. Besides, the intensive and extensive extraction of both renewable and non-renewable resources has exhausted some of these Fig. 7.1 Water bodies: small, snow-fed Himalayan streams are the few fresh-water sources that remain unpolluted. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT vital resources and we are compelled to spend huge amounts on technology and research to explore new resources. Added to these are the health costs of degraded environmental quality   decline in air and water quality (seventy per cent of water in India is polluted) have resulted in increased incidence of respiratory  and water-borne diseases. Hence the expenditure on health is also rising. To make matters worse, global environmental issues such as global warming and ozone depletion also contribute to increased financial commitments for the government. Box 7.1: Global Warming Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth s lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the Industrial Revolution. Much of the recent observed and projected global warming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes will make our planet s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and CH4 have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century, the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1 F (0.6 C) and sea level has risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding; disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an increased incidence of tropical diseases. Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations. Thus, it is clear that the opportunity costs of negative environmental impacts are high. The biggest question that arises is: are environmental problems new to this century? If so, why? The answer to this question requires some elaboration. In the early days when civilisation just began, or before this phenomenal increase in population, and before countries took to industrialisation, the demand for environmental resources and services was much less than their supply. This meant that pollution was within the absorptive capacity of the ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Box 7.2: Ozone Depletion Ozone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levels of chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in air- conditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from 1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths of ultraviolet light from passing through the Earth s atmosphere, observed and projected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to the adoption of the Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine compounds known as halons. environment and the rate of resource extraction was less than the rate of regeneration of these resources. Hence environmental problems did not arise. But with population explosion and with the advent of industrial revolution to meet the growing needs of the changed. The result was that the demand for resources for both production and consumption went beyond the rate of regeneration of the resources; the pressure on the absorptive capacity of the environment increased tremendously   this trend continues even today. Thus what has happened is a reversal of supply-demand relationship for environmental quality   we are now faced with increased demand for environmental resources and services but their supply is limited due to overuse Fig. 7.2 Damodar Valley is one of  India s most industrialised regions. Pollutants from the  heavy industries along the banks of the Damodar river are converting it into an ecological disaster INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and misuse. Hence issues of waste 7.3 STATE OF INDIA S India has abundant natural resources in terms of rich quality of soil, hundreds of lush green forests, plenty of mineral deposits beneath the land surface, vast stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of mountains, etc. The black soil of the Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable for cultivation of cotton, leading to concentration of textile industries in this region. The Indo-Gangetic plains   spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal   are one of the most fertile, intensively cultivated and densely populated regions in the world. India s forests, though unevenly distributed, provide green cover for a majority of its population and natural cover for its wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal and natural gas are found in the country. India accounts for nearly 8 per cent of the world s total iron-ore reserves. Bauxite, copper, chromate, diamonds, gold, lead, lignite, manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also available in different parts of the country. However, the developmental activities in India have resulted in pressure on its finite natural resources, besides creating impacts on human health and well-being. The threat to India s environment poses a dichotomy  threat of poverty-induced environmental degradation and, at the same time, threat of pollution from affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector. Air pollution, water contamination, soil erosion, deforestation and wildlife extinction are some of the most pressing environmental concerns of India. The priority issues identified are (i) land degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air pollution with special reference to vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv) management of fresh water and (v) solid waste management. Land in India suffers from varying degrees and types of degradation stemming mainly from unstable use and inappropriate Fig. 7.3 Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity  loss and ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Box. 7.3: Chipko or Appiko   What s in a Name? You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,  Appiko, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi district, 160 men, women and children hugged the trees and forced the woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in the forest over the next six weeks. Only after the forest officials assured the volunteers that the trees will be cut scientifically and in accordance with the working plan of the district, did they leave the trees. contractors damaged a large number of natural forests, the idea of hugging the trees gave the people hope and confidence that they can protect the forests. On that particular incident, with the felling discontinued, the people saved 12,000 trees. Within months, this movement spread to many adjoining Indiscriminate felling of trees for fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems. Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo has been wiped out from that area.  Broad-leaved trees which protected the soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed, says a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are now attacking the crops. Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled. Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs 10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think? Source: Excerpts from   State of India s Environment 2: The Second Citizens  Report 1984-85, Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Work These Out   In order to enable the students to appreciate the contribution of environment to economic development, the following game can be introduced. One student may name a product used by any enterprise and the other student may trace out its roots to nature and earth. steel and rubber   A truck driver had to pay Rs 10,000 as challan as his truck was emitting black soot. Why do you think he was penalised? Was it justified? Discuss. Some of the factors responsible for land degradation are (i) loss of vegetation occuring due to deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest lands (v) forest fires and over grazing (vi) non-adoption of adequate soil conservation measures (vii) improper crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and pesticides (ix) improper planning and management of irrigation systems (x) extraction of ground water in the competing uses of land for forestry, agriculture, pastures, human settlements and industries exert an enormous pressure on the country s finite land resources. The per capita forest land in the country is only 0.06 hectare against the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet basic needs, resulting in an excess felling of about 15 million cubic metre forests over the permissible limit. Estimates of soil erosion show that soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3 billion tonnes a year for the entire excess of the recharge capacity (xi) open access resource and (xii) poverty of the agriculture-dependent people. India supports approximately 17 per cent of the world s human and 20 per cent of livestock population on a mere 2.5 per cent of the world s geographical area. The high density of population and livestock and country as a result of which the country loses 0.8 million tonnes of nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes of potassium every year. According to the Government of India, the quantity of nutrients lost due to erosion each year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Box 7.4: Pollution Control Boards In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country. These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control or abatement. They organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents. They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning. The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks, drains and canals. Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution. ou might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other information and discuss them in the classroom. In India, air pollution is widespread in urban areas where vehicles are the major contributors and in a few other areas which have a high concentra- tion of industries and thermal power plants. Vehicular emissions are of par ticular concern since these are ground level sources and, thus, have the maximum impact on the general population. The number of motor vehicles has increased from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 35 crores in 2022. During this year, two-wheeled vehicles and cars constituted about 85 per cent of the total number of registered vehicles thus contribute significantly to total air pollution load. India is one of the ten most industrialised nations of the world. But this status has brought with it unwanted and unanticipated consequences such as unplanned urbanisation, pollution and the risk of accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Control Board) has identified seventeen categories of industries (large and medium scale) as significantly polluting (See Box 7.4). allow all future generations to have a potential average quality of life that is at least as high as that which is being enjoyed by the current generation. The concept of sustainable development was emphasised by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), which defined it as:  Development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs. Read the definition again. You will notice that the term  need  and the phrase  future generations  in the definition are the catch phrases. The use of the concept  needs  in the definition is linked to distribution of resources. The seminal report   Our Common Future that gave the above definition explained sustainable development as   meeting the basic needs of all and extending to all the opportunity to satisfy their aspirations for a better life. Meeting the needs of all requires redistributing resources and is hence a moral issue. Edward Barbier defined sustainable development as one which is directly concerned with increasing the material standard of living of the poor at the grass root level   this can be quantitatively measured in terms of increased income, real income, educational services, health care, sanitation, water supply etc. In more specific terms, sustainable development aims at decreasing the absolute poverty of the poor by providing lasting and secure livelihoods that minimise resource depletion, environmental The above points highlight the challenges to India s environment. The various measures adopted by the Ministry of Environment and the central and state pollution control boards may not yield reward unless we consciously adopt a path of sustainable development. The concern for future generations alone can make development last forever. Development to enhance our current living styles, without concern for posterity, will deplete resources and degrade environment at a pace that is bound to result in both environmental and 7.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Environment and economy are interdependent and need each other. Hence, development that ignores its repercussions on the environment will destroy the environment that sustains life forms. What is needed is sustainable development: development that will Work This Out   You can see a column on the measure of air  pollution in any national daily. Cut out the news item a week before Diwali, on the day of Diwali and two days after Diwali. Do you observe a significant difference in the value? Discuss in your class. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT degradation, cultural disruption and social instability. Sustainable development is, in this sense, a development that meets the basic needs of all, particularly the poor majority, for employment, food, energy, water, housing, and ensures growth of agriculture, manufacturing, power and services to meet these needs. The Brundtland Commission emphasises on protecting the future generation. This is in line with the argument of the environmentalists who emphasise that we have a moral obligation to hand over the planet earth in good order to the future generation; that is, the present generation should bequeath a better environment to the future generation. At least we should leave to the next generation a stock of  quality of life  assets no less than what we have inherited. The present generation can promote development that enhances the natural and built environment in ways that are compatible with (i) conservation of natural assets (ii) preservation of the regenerative capacity of the world s  natural ecological system (iii) avoiding the imposition of added costs or risks on According to Herman Daly, a leading environmental economist, to achieve sustainable development,   the following needs to be done  (i) limiting the human population to a level within the carrying capacity of the environment is like limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll line for the economy, human scale grows beyond the carrying capacity of the earth and deviates from sustainable development (ii) technological progress should be input efficient and not input consuming (iii) renewable resources resources rate of depletion should not exceed the rate of creation of renewable substitutes and (v) inefficiencies arising from pollution should be corrected. In 2015, the UN formulated 17 Sustainable achieved by the year 2030. Collect the 7.5 STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE Use of Non-conventional Sources of Energy: India, as you know, is hugely dependent on thermal and hydro power plants to meet its power needs. Both of these have adverse environmental impacts. Thermal power plants emit large quantities of carbon dioxide which is a green house gas. It also produces fly ash which,  if not used properly, can cause pollution of water bodies, land and other components of the environment. Hydroelectric projects inundate forests and interfere with the natural flow of water in catchment areas and the river basins. Wind power and solar rays are good examples of conventional sources of energy. In recent years, some efforts are being taken to tap these energy resources. Collect the details of one such unit set up in your area if any, and discuss in the class. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas: Households in rural areas generally use wood, dung cake or other biomass as fuel. This practice has several adverse implications like deforestation, reduction in green cover, wastage of cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify the situation, subsidised LPG is being provided. In addition, gobar gas plants are being provided through easy loans and subsidy. As far as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is a clean fuel   it reduces household pollution to a large extent. Also, energy wastage is minimised. For the  gobar gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed to the plant and gas is produced which is used as fuel while the slurry which is left over is a very good organic fertiliser and soil conditioner. CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as fuel in public transport system has significantly lowered air pollution and the air has become cleaner. In the last few years many other Indian cities also began to use CNG. Wind Power: In areas where speed of wind is usually high, wind mills can provide electricity without any adverse impact on the environment. Wind turbines move with the wind and electricity is generated. No doubt, the initial cost is high. But the benefits are such that the high cost gets easily Work This Out   In Delhi, buses and other public transport vehicles uses CNG as fuel instead of petrol or diesel; some vehicles use convertible engines; solar energy is being used to light up the streets. What do you think about these changes? Delhi also adopted odd/even scheme to restrict the use of vehicles with registration ending with odd/even numbers on alternative days, for specific period in a year. Organise a debate in class on the need for sustainable development practices in India. Fig.7.4 Gobar Gas Plant uses cattle dung to produce energy ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Solar Power through Photovoltaic Cells: India is naturally endowed with a large quantity of solar energy in the form of sunlight. We use it in different ways. For example, we dry our clothes, grains, other agricultural products as well as various items made for daily use. We also use sunlight to warm ourselves in winter. Plants use solar energy to perform photosynthesis. Now, with the help of photovoltaic cells,  solar energy can be converted into electricity. These cells use special kind of materials to capture solar energy and then convert the energy into electricity. This technology is extremely useful for remote areas and for places where supply of power through grid or power lines is either not possible or proves very costly. This technique is also totally free from pollution. In recent years India is taking efforts to increase the power generation through solar. India is also leading an International body called International Solar Alliance (ISA). Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous regions, streams can be found almost everywhere. A large percentage of such streams are perennial. Mini-hydel plants use the energy of such streams to move small turbines. The turbines generate electricity which can be used locally. Such power plants are more or less environment-friendly as they do not change the land use pattern in areas where they are located; they generate enough power to meet local demands. This means that they can also do away with the need for large scale transmission towers and cables and avoid transmission loss. Practices: Traditionally, Indian people have been close to their environment. They have been more a component of the environment and not its controller. If we look back at our agriculture system, healthcare system, housing, transport etc., we find that all practices have been environment friendly. Only recently have we drifted away from the traditional systems and caused large scale damage to the environment and also our  rural heritage. Now, it is time to go back. One apt example is in healthcare. India is very much privileged to have  about 15,000 species of plants which have medicinal properties. About 8,000 of these are in regular use in various systems of treatment including the folk tradition. With the sudden onslaught of the western system of treatment, we ignored our traditional systems such as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk systems. These healthcare systems are in great demand again for treating chronic health problems. Now a days every cosmetic produce   hair oil, toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and what not   is herbal in composition. Not only are these products environment friendly, they are relatively free from side effects and do not involve large-scale industrial and chemical processing. Biocomposting: In our quest to increase agricultural production during the last five decades or so, we almost totally neglected the use of compost and completely switched over to chemical fertilisers. The result is that large tracts of productive land have INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT been adversely affected, water bodies including ground water system have suffered due to chemical contamination and demand for irrigation has been going up year after year. Farmers, in large numbers all over the country, have again started using compost made from organic wastes of different types. In certain parts of the country, cattle are maintained only because they produce dung which is an important fertiliser and soil Earthworms can convert organic matter into compost faster than the normal composting process. This process is now being widely used. Indirectly, the civic authorities are benefited too as they have to dispose reduced quantity of waste. Biopest Control:  With the advent of green revolution, the entire country entered into a frenzy to use more and more chemical pesticides for higher yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began contaminated, soil, water bodies and even ground water were polluted with pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes were found to be contaminated. To meet this challenge, efforts are on to bring in better methods of pest control. One such step is the use of pesticides based on plant products. Neem trees are proving to be quite useful. Several types of pest controlling chemicals have been isolated from neem and these are being used. Mixed cropping and growing different crops in consecutive years on the same land have also helped farmers. In addition, awareness is spreading about various animals and birds which help in controlling pests. For example, snakes are one of the prime group of animals which prey upon rats, mice and various other pests. Similarly, large varieties of birds, for example, owls and peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests. If these are allowed to dwell around the agricultural areas, they can clear large varieties of pests including insects. Lizards are also important in this regard. We need to know their value and Sustainable development has become a catch phrase today. It is  indeed  a paradigm shift in development thinking. Though it has been interpreted in a number of ways, adherence to this path ensures lasting development and non-declining welfare Economic development, which aimed at increasing the production of goods and services to meet the needs of a rising population, puts greater pressure on the environment. In the initial stages of development, the demand for environmental resources was less than that of supply. Now the world is faced with increased demand for environmental resources but their supply is limited due to overuse and misuse. Sustainable development aims at promoting the kind of development that minimises environmental problems and meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT What is meant by environment? What happens when the rate of resource extraction exceeds that of Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable resources (i) trees (ii) fish (iii) petroleum (iv) coal (v) iron-ore (vi) water. Two major environmental issues facing the world today are ____________ How do the following factors contribute to the environmental crisis in India? What problem do they pose for the government?   Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides   Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed a huge stress on the environment.   Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and   The threat to India s environment is of two dimensions  threat of poverty induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector.   Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable   Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs.   Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Affluent consumption standards Reduction of forest coverage What are the functions of the environment? Identify six factors contributing to land degradation in India. Explain how the opportunity costs of negative environmental impact Outline the steps involved in attaining sustainable development in India. India has abundant natural resources  substantiate the statement. Is environmental crisis a recent phenomenon? If so, why? Give two instances of (a) Overuse of environmental resources (b) Misuse of environmental resources. State any four pressing environmental concerns of India. Correction for environmental damages involves opportunity costs   explain. Explain how the supply-demand reversal of environmental resources account for the current environmental crisis. Highlight any two serious adverse environmental consequences of development in India. India s environmental problems pose a dichotomy   they are poverty induced and, at the same time, due to affluence in living standards   is this true? What is sustainable development? Keeping in view  your locality, describe any four strategies of sustainable Explain the relevance of intergenerational equity in the definition of Suppose 70 lakh cars are added every year to the roads of metropolitans. Which type of resources do you think are undergoing depletion? Discuss. Make a list of items that can be recycled. SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Prepare a chart on the causes and remedies of soil erosion in India. How does population explosion contribute to the environmental crisis? Debate in the classroom. The nation has to pay heavily for correcting environmental damages   A paper factory is to be set up in your village. Arrange a role play consisting of an activist, an industrialist and a group of villagers. AGARWAL, ANIL and SUNITA NARAIN. 1996. Global Warming in an Unequal World. Centre for Science and Environment, Reprint Edition, New Delhi. BHARUCHA, E. 2005. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses, Universities Press (India) Pvt Ltd. CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India s Environment 1: The First Citizens  Report 1982. Reprint Edition, New Delhi. CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India s Environment 2: The Second Citizens  Report 1985, Reprint Edition, New Delhi. KARPAGAM, M. 2001.Environmental Economics: A Textbook. Sterling Publishers, RAJAGOPALAN, R. 2005. Environmental Studies:  From Crisis to Cure. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. SCHUMACHER, E.F. Small is Beautiful. Abacus Publishers, New York. State of India s Environment (for various years), Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi. Scientific American, India, Special Issue, September 2005 Down to Earth, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi. DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA: A COMPARISON In today s globalised world, where geographical boundaries are slowly becoming meaningless, it is important for neighbouring countries in the developing world to understand the development strategies being pursued by their neighbours. This is more so because they share the relatively limited economic space in world markets. In this unit, we will compare India s developmental experiences with two of its important and strategic neighbours   Pakistan and China. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will figure out comparative trends in various economic and human development indicators of India and its neighbours, China and Pakistan assess the strategies that these countries have adopted to reach their present state of development. COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS In the preceding units we studied the developmental experience of India in detail. We also studied the kind of policies India adopted, which had varying impacts in different sectors. Over the last two decades or so, the economic transformation that is taking place in different countries across the world, partly because of the process of globalisation, has both short as well as long-term implications for each country, including India. Nations have been primarily trying to adopt various means which will strengthen their own domestic economies. To this effect, they are forming regional and global economic groupings such as the SAARC, European Union, ASEAN, G-8, G-20, BRICS etc. In addition, there is also an increasing eagerness on the parts of various nations to try and understand the developmental processes pursued by their neighbouring nations as it allows them to better comprehend their own strengths and weaknesses vis- -vis their neighbours. In the unfolding process of globalisation, this is particularly considered essential by developing countries as they face competition not only from developed nations but also amongst themselves in the relatively limited economic space enjoyed by the developing world. Besides, an understanding of the other economies in our neighbourhood is also required as all major common economic activities in the region impinge on overall human development in a In this chapter we will compare the developmental strategies pursued by India and the largest two of its neighbouring economies Pakistan and China. It has to be remembered that despite being endowed with vast natural resources, there is little similarity between the political power setup of India - the largest democracy of the world which is wedded to a secular and deeply liberal Constitution for more than half a century, and the militarist political power structure of Pakistan or the command economy of China that has only recently started moving towards a democratic system and more liberal economic 8.2 DEVELOPMENTAL PATH A Do you know that India, Pakistan and China have many similarities in their developmental strategies? All the three nations have started towards their developmental path at the same time. While India and Pakistan became independent nations in 1947, People s Republic of China was established in 1949. In a speech at that time, Geography has made us neighbours. History has made us friends. Economics has made us partners, and necessity has made us allies. Those whom God has so joined together, let no man put asunder. John F. Kennedy INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Jawaharlal Nehru had said,  These new and revolutionary changes in China and India, even though they differ in content, symbolise the new spirit of Asia and new vitality which is finding expression in the countries in All three countries had started planning their development strategies in similar ways. While India announced its first Five Year Plan for 1951 56, Pakistan announced its first five year plan, now called the Medium Term Development Plan, in 1956. China announced its First Five Year Plan in 1953. Since 2018, Pakistan is working on the basis of 12th Five Year Development Plan (2018 23), whereas, China is working on 14th Five Year Plan (2021 25). Until March 2017, India has been following Five Year Plan- based development model. India and Pakistan adopted similar strategies, such as creating a large public sector and raising public expenditure on social development. Till the 1980s, all the three countries had similar growth rates and per capita incomes. Where do they stand today in comparison to one another? Before we answer this question, let us trace the historical path of developmental policies in China and Pakistan. After studying the last three units, we already know what policies India has been adopting since its Independence. China: After the establishment of People s Republic of China under one- party rule, all critical sectors of the economy, enterprises and lands owned and operated by individuals were brought under government control. The Great Leap Forward (GLF) campaign initiated in 1958 aimed at industrialising the country on a massive scale. People were encouraged to set up industries in their backyards. In rural areas, communes were started. Under the Commune system, people collectively cultivated lands. In 1958, there were 26,000 communes covering almost all the farm GLF campaign met with many problems. A severe drought caused havoc in China killing about 30 million people. When Russia had conflicts with China, it withdrew its professionals who had earlier been sent to China to help in the industrialisation process. In 1965, Mao introduced the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution (1966 76) under which students and professionals were sent to work and learn from the countryside. The present day fast industrial growth in China can be traced back to the reforms introduced in 1978. China introduced reforms in phases. In the initial phase, reforms were initiated in agriculture, foreign trade and investment sectors. In agriculture, for instance, commune lands were divided into small plots, which were allocated (for use not ownership) to individual households. They were allowed to keep all income from the land after paying stipulated taxes. In the later phase, reforms were initiated in the industrial sector. Private sector firms, in general, and township and village enterprises, i.e., those enterprises which were owned and operated by local collectives, in particular, were allowed to produce COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS goods. At this stage, enterprises  owned by government (known as State Owned Enterprises SOEs), which we,  in India, call public sector enterprises, were made to face competition. The reform process also involved dual pricing. This means fixing the prices in two ways;  farmers and industrial units were required to buy and sell fixed quantities of inputs and outputs on the basis of prices fixed by the government and the rest were purchased and sold at market prices. Over the years, as production increased, the proportion of goods or inputs transacted in the market also increased.  In order to attract foreign investors, special economic zones were set up. Pakistan: While looking at various economic policies that Pakistan adopted, you will notice many similarities with India. Pakistan also follows the mixed economy model with co-existence of public and private sectors. In the late 1950s and 1960s, Pakistan introduced a variety of regulated policy framework (for import substitution-based industrialisation). The policy combined tariff protection for manufacturing of consumer goods together with direct import controls on competing imports. The introduction of Green Revolution led to mechanisation and increase in public investment in infrastructure in select areas, which finally led to a rise in the production of foodgrains. This changed the agrarian structure dramatically. In the 1970s, nationalisation of capital goods industries took place. Pakistan then shifted its policy orientation in the late 1970s and 1980s when the major thrust areas were denationalisation and encouragement of private sector. During this period, Pakistan also received financial support from western nations and remittances from Wagah Border is not only a tourist place but also used for trade between India and Pakistan INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT continuously increasing outflow of emigrants to the Middle-east. This helped the country in stimulating economic growth. The then government also offered incentives to the private sector. All this created a conducive climate for new investments. In 1988, reforms were initiated in the country. Having studied a brief outline of the developmental strategies of China and Pakistan, let us now compare some of the developmental indicators of India, China and Pakistan. 8.3 DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS If we look at the global population, out of every six persons living in this world, one is an Indian and another a Chinese. We shall compare some demographic indicators of India, China and Pakistan.  The population of Pakistan is very small and accounts for roughly about one-tenth of China Though China is the largest nation and geographically occupies the largest area among the three nations, its density is the lowest. Table 8.1  shows the population growth as being the highest in Pakistan, followed by India and China. Scholars point out the one- child norm introduced in China in the late 1970s as the major reason for  low population growth. They also state that this measure led to a decline in the sex ratio, the proportion of females per 1000 males. However, from the table, you will notice that the sex ratio is low and biased against females in all three countries. Scholars cite son preference prevailing in all these countries as the reason. In recent times, all three countries are adopting various measures to improve the situation. One- child norm and the resultant  arrest in the growth of population also have other implications. For instance, after a few decades, in China, there will be more elderly people in proportion to young people. This led China to allow couples to have two children. The fertility rate is also low in China and very high in Pakistan. Urbanisation is high in China with India having 36 per cent of its people living in urban areas. Select Demographic Indicators, 2022 (per sq. km) Source: World Development Indicators 2024, https://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-development- COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS 8.4 GROSS DOMESTIC One of the much-talked issues around the world about China is its growth of Gross Domestic Product. China has the second largest GDP (PPP) of $35 trillion in the world, whereas, India s GDP (PPP) is $15 trillion s GDP is $1.5 trillion, roughly about 10 per cent of is about 42 per cent of When many developed countries were finding it difficult to maintain a growth rate of even 5 per cent, China was able to maintain near double-digit growth during 1980s as can be seen from Table 8.2. Also, notice that in the 1980s, Pakistan was ahead of India; China was having double-digit growth and India was at the bottom. In 2015 17 and 2024, there has been  a  decline in Work These Out   Does India follow any population stabilisation measures? If so, collect the details and discuss in the classroom. Y ou may refer to the latest Economic Survey, annual reports or website of the Ministry of Health and Family   Scholars find son preference as a common phenomenon in many developing countries, including India, China and Pakistan. Do you find this phenomenon in your family or neighbourhood? Why do people practise discrimination between male and female children? What do you think about it? Discuss it in the classroom. Fig. 8.2 Land use and agriculture in India, China and Pakistan (Not to scale) Source: Key Indicators for Asia and Pacific 2016, Asian Development Bank, Philippines; World Development Indicators 2024 Annual Growth of Gross Domestic Product (%), 1980 2017 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Pakistan  and China  s growth rates, whereas, India met with moderate increase in growth rates. Some scholars hold the reform processes introduced in Pakistan and political instability over a long period as reasons behind the declining growth rate in Pakistan. We will study in a later section which sector contributed to different growth rates in these countries. First, look at how people engaged in different sectors contribute to the Gross Domestic Product now called as Gross Value Added. It was pointed out in the previous section that China and Pakistan have more urban population than India. In China, due to topographic and climatic conditions, the area suitable for cultivation is relatively small   only about 10 per cent of its total land area. The total cultivable area in China accounts for 40 per cent of the cultivable area in India. Until the 1980s, more than 80 per cent of the people in China were dependent on farming as their sole source of livelihood. Since then, the government to leave their fields and transport.  In 2021, with 23 per cent of its workforce engaged in agriculture, its contribution to the GVA in China is 8 per cent (see In both India and Pakistan, the contribution of agriculture to GVA were 16 and 24 per cent, respectively, but the proportion of workforce that works in this sector is more in India. In Pakistan, about 37 per cent of people work in agriculture, whereas, in India, it is 46 per cent. Twenty four per cent of Pakistan workforce is engaged in industry but it produces 19 per cent of GVA. In India, industry workforce Fig. 8.3 Industry in India, China and Pakistan (Not to scale) COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS account for 25 per cent but produces goods worth 29 per cent of GDP China, industries contribute to GDP at 39, and employ 32 per cent of workforce. In all the three countries, service sector contributes highest share development, countries first shift their employment and output from agriculture to Industry and then to services. This is what is happening in China as can be seen from Table 8.3. The proportion of workforce engaged in industry in India and Pakistan was low at 25 per cent. The contribution of industries to GDP is at 29 per cent in India and 20 per cent in Pakistan. In these countries, the shift is taking place directly to the service sector. Thus, in all the three countries the service sector is emerging as a major player of development. It contributes more to GDP and, at the same time, emerges as a prospective employer. If we look at the proportion of workforce in the1980s, Pakistan was faster in shifting its workforce to service sector than India and China. In the 1980s, India, China and Pakistan employed 17, 12 and 27 per cent of its workforce in the service. In 2019, it has reached the level of 29, 45 and 38 per cent, respectively In the last five decades, the growth of agriculture sector, which employs the largest proportion of workforce in all the three countries, has declined. In the industrial sector, China has maintained a near double-digit growth rate in 1980s but began showing decline in recent years, Sectoral Share of Employment and GDP (%) in 2021 Contribution to GVA Distribution of Workforce Source: World Development Indicators Database 2024; Key Indicators of Asia and Pacific 2024. Work These Out   Do you think it is necessary for India and Pakistan to concentrate on the manu- facturing sector as China   Scholars argue that the service sector should not be considered as an engine of growth whereas India and Pakistan have raised their share of output mainly in this sector only. What do INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT whereas, for India and Pakistan growth rate has declined. In case of service sector, China was able to maintain its rate of growth during 1980 1990,while there was a positive and increasing growth of India s service sector output. Thus, China s growth is contributed by the manufacturing and service sectors and India s growth by the service sector. During this period, Pakistan has shown deceleration in all INDICATORS OF HUMAN You might have studied about the importance of human development indicators in the lower classes and the position of many developed and developing countries. Let us look how India, China and Pakistan have performed in some of the select indicators of human development. Look at Table 8.5. Trends in Output Growth in Different Sectors, 1980 2015 Some Selected Indicators of Human Development, 2017-2019 Human Development Index (Value) Rank (based on HDI) Life Expectancy at Birth (years) Mean years of Schooling (aged 15 and above) in % Gross National Income per Capita (PPP US$) People living Below Poverty Line (%) (National) Infant Mortality Rate (per 1000 live births) Maternal Mortality Rate (per 1 lakh births) People  using at least basic Sanitation (% of population) People using at least basic drinking Water Source (% of population) Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population) Note: for the year (*) 2019-21; (**) 2016; (***) 2018-2019. Sources: Human Development Report 2023-24; World Development Indicators Metadata 2024. COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS Table 8.5 shows that China is moving ahead of India and Pakistan. This is true for many indicators   income indicator such as GDP per capita, or proportion of population below poverty line or health indicators such as mortality rates, access to sanitation, literacy, life expectancy or malnourishment. China and Pakistan are ahead of India in reducing proportion of people below the poverty line and also their performance in sanitation. But India and Pakistan have not been able to save women from maternal mortality. In China, for one lakh births, only 29 women die whereas in India and Pakistan, about 133 and 140 women die respectively. Surprisingly all the three countries report providing improved drinking water sources for most of its population. China has the smallest share of poor among the three countries. Find out for yourself how these differences occur. In dealing with or making judgements on such questions, however, we should also note a problem while using the human development indicators given above with conviction. This occurs because these are all extremely important indicators; but these are not sufficient. Along with these, we also need what may be called  liberty indicators. One such indicator has actually been added as a measure of  the extent of democratic participation in social and political decision-making  but it has not been given any extra weight. Some obvious  liberty indicators  like measures of  the extent of Constitutional protection given to rights of citizens  or  the extent of constitutional protection of the Independence of the Judiciary and the Rule of Law  have not even been introduced so far. Without including these (and perhaps some more) and giving them overriding importance in the list, the construction of a human development index may be said to be incomplete and its 8.6 DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES   AN It is common to find developmental strategies of a country as a model to others for lessons and guidance for their own development. It is particularly evident after the introduction of the reform process in different parts of the world. In order to learn from economic performance of our neighbouring countries, it is necessary to have an understanding of the roots of their successes and failures. It is also necessary to distinguish between, and contrast, the different phases of their strategies. Though countries go through their development phases differently, let us take the initiation of reforms as a point of reference. We know that reforms were initiated in China in 1978, Pakistan in 1988 and India in 1991. Let us briefly assess their achievements and failures in pre- and structural reforms in 1978?  China did not have any compulsion to introduce INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT reforms as dictated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund to India and Pakistan. The new leadership at that time in China was not happy with the slow pace of growth and lack of modernisation in the Chinese economy under the Maoist rule. They felt that Maoist vision of economic development based on decentralisation, self sufficiency and shunning of foreign technology, goods and capital had failed. Despite extensive land reforms, collectivisation, the Great Leap Forward and other initiatives, the per capita grain output in 1978 was the same as it was in the It was found that establishment of infrastructure in the areas of education and health, land reforms, long existence of decentralised planning and existence of small enterprises had helped positively in improving the social and income indicators in the post reform period. Before the introduction of reforms, there had already been massive extension of basic health services in rural areas.  Through the commune system, there was more equitable distribution of food grains. Experts also point out that each reform measure was first implemented at a smaller level and then  extended on a massive scale. The experimentation under decentralised government enabled to assess the economic, social and political costs of success or failure. For instance, when reforms were made in agriculture, as pointed out earlier by handing over plots of land to individuals for cultivation, it brought prosperity to a vast number of poor people. It created conditions for the subsequent phenomenal growth in rural industries and built up a strong support base for more reforms. Scholars quote many such examples on how reform measures led to rapid growth in China. Scholars argue that in Pakistan the reform process led to worsening of all the economic indicators. We have seen in an earlier section that compared to 1980s, the growth rate of GDP and its sectoral constituents have not yet improved. Though the data on international poverty line for Pakistan is quite healthy,  scholars using the official data of Pakistan indicate rising poverty there. The proportion of poor in 1960s was more than 40 per cent which declined to 25 per cent in 1980s and started rising again in the recent decades. The reasons for the slow- down of growth and re-emergence of poverty in Pakistan s economy, as scholars put it, are agricultural growth and food supply situation were based not  on an institutionalised process of technical change but on good harvest. When there was a good harvest, the economy was in good condition, when it was not, the economic indicators showed stagnation or negative trends. You will recall that India had to borrow from  the IMF and World Bank to set right its balance of payments crisis; foreign exchange is an essential component for any country and it is COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS Work These Out   While India has performed relatively well vis- -vis other developing countries (including its Asian neighbours) in terms of economic growth, India is yet to show the world that there is considerable progress in terms of human development indicators. Where India went wrong ? Why did we not take care of our human resources? Discuss in the classroom.   There is a general perception going around in India that there is sudden increase in dumping of Chinese goods into India which have implications for manufacturing sector in India and also that we do not engage ourselves in trading with our neighbouring nations. Look at the following table, which shows exports from India to, and imports from, Pakistan and China. From newspapers and websites and listening to news, collect the details of goods and services transacted in trading with our neighbours. In order to get detailed information relating to international trade, you can log on to the website: http:/   Calculate exports as a % of imports for both the years and discuss the probable reasons for the trend in the class. Exports from India ( Rs in crore) Imports to India (Rs  in crore) INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT important to know how it can be earned. If a country is able to build up its foreign exchange earnings by sustainable export of manufactured goods, it need not worry. In Pakistan most foreign exchange earnings came from remittances from Pakistani workers in the Middle-east and the exports of highly volatile agricultural products; there was also growing dependence on foreign loans on the one hand and increasing difficulty in paying back the loans on the other. However, during the last few years, Pakistan has recovered its economic growth and has been sustaining. In 2017-18, the Annual Plan 2019-20 reports that, the GDP registered a growth of 5.5 per cent, highest when compared to the previous decade. While agriculture recorded growth rate far from satisfactory level, industrial and service sectors grew at 4.9 and 6.2 per cent respectively. Many macroeconomic indicators also began to show stable and positive trends. What are we learning from the developmental experiences of our neighbours? India, China and Pakistan have travelled seven decades of developmental path with varied results. Till the late 1970s, all of them were maintaining the same level of low development. The last three decades have taken these countries to different levels. India, with democratic institutions,  performed moderately, but a majority of its people still depend on agriculture. India has taken many initiatives to develop the infrastructure and improve the standard of living. Scholars are of the opinion that political instability, over-dependence on remittances and foreign aid along agriculture sector are the reasons for the slowdown of the Pakistan economy. Yet, last five years, many macroeconomic indicators began showing positive and moderate growth rates reflecting the economic recovery. In China, the lack of political freedom and its implications for human rights are major concerns; yet, in the last four decades, it used the  market system without losing political commitment  and succeeded in raising the level of growth alongwith alleviation of poverty. You will also notice that unlike India and Pakistan, which are attempting to enterprises, China has used the market mechanism to  create additional social and economic opportunities. By retaining collective ownership of land and allowing individuals to cultivate lands, China has ensured social security in rural areas. Public intervention in providing social infrastructure even prior to reforms has brought about positive results in human development indicators in China. COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS   With the unfolding of the globalisation process, developing countries are keen to understand the developmental processes pursued by their neighbours as they face competition from developed nations as also   India, Pakistan and China have similar physical endowments but totally different political systems.   All the three countries follow the similar planned pattern of development. However, the structures established to implement developmental policies are quite different.   Till the early 1980s, the developmental indicators of all the three countries, such as growth rates and sectoral contribution towards national income, were similar.   Reforms were introduced in 1978 in China, in 1988 in Pakistan and in 1991 in India.   China introduced structural reforms on its own initiative while they were forced upon India and Pakistan by international agencies.   The impact of policy measures were different in these countries   for instance, one-child norm has arrested the population growth in China whereas in India and Pakistan, a major change is yet to take place.   Even after seventy years of planned development, majority of the workforce in all the countries depends on agriculture. The dependency is greater in India.   Though China has followed the classical development pattern of gradual shift from agriculture to manufacturing and then to services, India and Pakistan s shift has been directly from agriculture to service   China s industrial sector has maintained a high growth rate while it is not so in both India and Pakistan. This led to rapid increase of the GDP per capita in China than in India and Pakistan.   China is ahead of India and Pakistan on many human development indicators. However these improvements were attributed not to the reform process but the strategies that China adopted in the pre-reform   While assessing the developmental indicators, one also has to consider the liberty indicators. INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Why are regional and economic groupings formed? What are the various means by which countries are trying to strengthen their own domestic economies? What similar developmental strategies have India and Pakistan followed for their respective developmental paths? Explain the Great Leap Forward campaign of China as initiated in China s rapid industrial growth can be traced back to its reforms in 1978. Do you agree? Elucidate. Describe the path of developmental initiatives taken by Pakistan for its economic development. What is the important implication of the  one child norm  in China? Mention the salient demographic indicators of China, Pakistan and Compare and contrast India and China s sectoral contribution towards GVA/GDP. What does it indicate? Mention the various indicators of human development. Define the liberty indicator. Give some examples of liberty indicators. Evaluate the various factors that led to the rapid growth in economic development in China. Group the following features pertaining to the economies of India, China and Pakistan under three heads   One-child norm   Low fertility rate   High degree of urbanisation   Mixed economy   Very high fertility rate   Large population   High density of population   Growth due to manufacturing sector   Growth due to service sector. COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS Give reasons for the slow growth and re-emergence of poverty in Compare and contrast the development of India, China and Pakistan with respect to some salient human development indicators. Comment on the growth rate trends witnessed in China and India in the last two decades. Fill in the blanks First Five Year Plan of ________________ commenced in the year 1956. (Pakistan/China) Maternal mortality rate is high in _____________. (China/ Proportion of people below poverty line is more in __________. Reforms in ______________ were introduced in 1978. (China/ Organise a class debate on the issue of free trade between India and China and India and Pakistan. You are aware that cheap Chinese goods are available in the market, for example, toys, electronic goods, clothes, batteries etc. Do you think that these products are comparable in quality and price with their Indian counterparts? Do they create a threat to our domestic Do you think India can introduce the one-child norm like China to reduce population growth? Organise a debate on the policies that India can follow to reduce population growth. China s growth is mainly contributed by the manufacturing sector and India s growth by the service sector  prepare a chart showing the relevance of this statement with respect to the structural changes in the last decade in the respective countries. How is China able to lead in all the Human Development Indicators? Discuss in the classroom. Use Human Development Report of the SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DREZE, JEAN AND AMARTYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and Social Opportunity. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. RAY, ALOK. 2002.  The Chinese Economic Miracle: Lessons to be Learnt.  Economic and Political Weekly, September 14, pp. 3835-3848. ZAIDI, S. AKBAR. 1999.  Is Poverty now a Permanent Phenomenon in Pakistan?  Economic and Political Weekly, October 9, pp. 2943-2951. Annual Plan 2016-17, Ministry of Planning, Development & Reform, Gov- ernment of Pakistan accessed from http:/ /pc.gov.pk on 02 January 2017. Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India (for various years). Human Development Report 2005, United Nations Development Programme, Oxford University Press, Oxford. Labour Market Indicators, 3rd  Edition, International Labour Organisation, Pakistan: National Human Development Report 2003, United Nations Development Programme, Second Impression 2004. World Development Report 2005, The World Bank, Oxford University Press, World Development Indicators for various years, World Bank Washington. Human Development Report for various years, United Nations Development Key Indicators of Asia and Pacific 2016, Asian Development Bank, Philippines.


=== Class12_Economics ===

You must have already been introduced to a study of basic microeconomics. This chapter begins by giving you a simplified account of how macroeconomics differs from the microeconomics that you have known. Those of you who will choose later to specialise in economics, for your higher studies, will know about the more complex analyses that are used by economists to study macroeconomics today. But the basic questions of the study of macroeconomics would remain the same and you will find that these are actually the broad economic questions that concern all citizens   Will the prices as a whole rise or come down? Is the employment condition of the country as a whole, or of some sectors of the economy, getting better or is it worsening? What would be reasonable indicators to show that the economy is better or worse? What steps, if any, can the State take, or the people ask for, in order to improve the state of the economy? These are the kind of questions that make us think about the health of the country s economy as a whole. These questions are dealt within macroeconomics at different levels of complexity. In this book you will be introduced to some of the basic principles of macroeconomic analysis. The principles will be stated, as far as possible, in simple language. Sometimes elementary algebra will be used in the treatment for introducing the reader to some rigour. If we observe the economy of a country as a whole it will appear that the output levels of all the goods and services in the economy have a tendency to move together. For example, if output of food grain is experiencing a growth, it is generally accompanied by a rise in the output level of industrial goods. Within the category of industrial goods also output of different kinds of goods tend to rise or fall simultaneously. Similarly, prices of different goods and services generally have a tendency to rise or fall simultaneously. We can also observe that the employment level in different production units also goes up or down If aggregate output level, price level, or employment level, in the different production units of an economy, bear close relationship to each other then the task of analysing the entire economy becomes relatively easy. Instead of dealing with the above mentioned variables at individual (disaggregated) levels, we can think of a single good as the representative of all the goods and services produced within the economy. This representative good will have a level of production which will correspond to the average production level of all the goods and services. Similarly, the price or employment level of this representative good will reflect the general price and employment level of the economy. In macroeconomics we usually simplify the analysis of how the country s total production and the level of employment are related to attributes (called  variables ) like prices, rate of interest, wage rates, profits and so on, by focusing on a single imaginary commodity and what happens to it. We are able to afford this simplification and thus usefully abstain from studying what happens to the many real commodities that actually are bought and sold in the market because we generally see that what happens to the prices, interests, wages and profits etc. for one commodity more or less also happens for the others. Particularly, when these attributes start changing fast, like when prices are going up (in what is called an inflation), or employment and production levels are going down (heading for a depression), the general directions of the movements of these variables for all the individual commodities are usually of the same kind as are seen for the aggregates for the economy as a whole. We will see below why, sometimes, we also depart from this useful simplification when we realise that the country s economy as a whole may best be seen as composed of distinct sectors. For certain purposes the interdependence of (or even rivalry between) two sectors of the economy (agriculture and industry, for example) or the relationships between sectors (like the household sector, the business sector and government in a democratic set-up) help us understand some things happening to the country s economy much better, than by only looking at the economy as a whole. While moving away from different goods and focusing on a representative good may be convenient, in the process, we may be overlooking some vital distinctive characteristics of individual goods. For example, production conditions of agricultural and industrial commodities are of a different nature. Or, if we treat a single category of labour as a representative of all kinds of labours, we may be unable to distinguish the labour of the manager of a firm from the labour of the accountant of the firm. So, in many cases, instead of a single representative category of good (or labour, or production technology), we may take a handful of different kinds of goods. For example, three general kinds of commodities may be taken as a representative of all commodities being produced within the economy: agricultural goods, industrial goods and services. These goods may have different production technology and different prices. Macroeconomics also tries to analyse how the individual output levels, prices, and employment levels of these different goods gets determined. From this discussion here, and your earlier reading of microeconomics, you may have already begun to understand in what way macroeconomics differs from microeconomics. To recapitulate briefly, in microeconomics, you came across individual  economic agents  (see box) and the nature of the motivations that drive them. They were  micro  (meaning  small ) agents   consumers choosing their respective optimum combinations of goods to buy, given their tastes and incomes; and producers trying to make maximum profit out of producing their goods keeping their costs as low as possible and selling at a price as high as they could get in the markets. In other words, microeconomics was a study of individual markets of demand and supply and the  players, or the decision-makers, were also individuals (buyers or sellers, even companies) who were seen as trying to maximise their profits (as producers or sellers) and their personal satisfaction or welfare levels (as consumers). Even a large company was  micro  in the sense that it had to act in the interest of its own shareholders which was not necessarily the interest of the country as a whole. For microeconomics the  macro  (meaning  large ) phenomena affecting the economy as a whole, like inflation or unemployment, were either not mentioned or were taken as given. These were not variables that individual buyers or sellers could change. The nearest that microeconomics got to macroeconomics was when it looked at General Equilibrium, meaning the equilibrium of supply and demand in each market in the economy. Macroeconomics tries to address situations facing the economy as a whole. Adam Smith, the founding father of modern economics, had suggested that if the buyers and sellers in each market take their decisions following only their own self-interest, economists will not need to think of the wealth and welfare of the country as a whole separately. But economists gradually discovered that they had to look further. Economists found that first, in some cases, the markets did not or could not exist. Secondly, in some other cases, the markets existed but failed to produce equilibrium of demand and supply. Thirdly, and most importantly, in a large number of situations society (or the State, or the people as a whole) had decided to pursue certain important social goals unselfishly (in areas like employment, administration, defence, education and health) for which some of the aggregate effects of the microeconomic decisions made by the individual economic agents needed to be modified. For these purposes macroeconomists had to study the effects in the markets of taxation and other budgetary policies, and policies for bringing about changes in money supply, the rate of interest, wages, employment, and output. Macroeconomics has, By economic units or economic agents, we mean those individuals or institutions which take economic decisions. They can be consumers who decide what and how  much to consume. They may be producers of goods and services who decide what and how much to produce. They may be entities like the government, corporation, banks which also take different economic decisions like how much to spend, what interest rate to charge on the credits, how much to therefore, deep roots in microeconomics because it has to study the aggregate effects of the forces of demand and supply in the markets. However, in addition, it has to deal with policies aimed at also modifying these forces, if necessary, to follow choices made by society outside the markets. In a developing country like India such choices have to be made to remove or reduce unemployment, to improve access to education and primary health care for all, to provide for good administration, to provide sufficiently for the defence of the country and so on. Macroeconomics shows two simple characteristics that are evident in dealing with the situations we have just listed. These are briefly mentioned below. First, who are the macroeconomic decision makers (or  players )? Macroeconomic policies are pursued by the State itself or statutory bodies like the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and similar institutions. Typically, each such body will have one or more public goals to pursue as defined by law or the Constitution of India itself. These goals are not those of individual economic agents maximising their private profit or welfare. Thus the macroeconomic agents are basically different from the Secondly, what do the macroeconomic decision-makers try to do? Obviously they often have to go beyond economic objectives and try to direct the deployment of economic resources for such public needs as we have listed above. Such activities are not aimed at serving individual self-interests. They are pursued for the welfare of the country and its people as a whole. Adam Smith is regarded as the founding father of modern economics (it was known as political economy at that time). He was a Scotsman and a professor at the University of Glasgow. Philosopher by training, his well known work An Enquiry into the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of Nations (1776) is regarded as the first major comprehensive book on the subject. The passage from the book.  It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, of the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our own necessities but of their advantage  is often cited as an advocacy for free market economy. The Physiocrats of France were prominent thinkers of political economy before Smith. 1.1 EMERGENCE OF MACROECONOMICS Macroeconomics, as a separate branch of economics, emerged after the British economist John Maynard Keynes published his celebrated book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money in 1936. The dominant thinking in economics before Keynes was that all the labourers who are ready to work will find employment and all the factories will be working at their full capacity. This school of thought is known as the However, the Great Depression of 1929 and the subsequent years saw the output and employment levels in the countries of Europe and North America fall by huge amounts. It affected other countries of the world as well. Demand for goods in the market was low, many factories were lying idle, workers were thrown out of jobs. In USA, from 1929 to 1933, unemployment rate rose from 3 per cent to 25 per cent (unemployment rate may be defined as the number of people who are not working and are looking for jobs divided by the total number of people who are working or looking for jobs). Over the same period aggregate output in USA fell by about 33 per cent. These events made economists think about the functioning of the economy in a new way. The fact that the economy may have long lasting unemployment had to be theorised about and explained. Keynes  book was an attempt in this direction. Unlike his predecessors, his approach was to examine the working of the economy in its entirety and examine the interdependence of the different sectors. The subject of macroeconomics was born. John Maynard Keynes, British economist, was born in 1883. He was educated in King s College, Cambridge, United Kingdom and later appointed its Dean. Apart from being a sharp intellectual he actively diplomacy during the years following the First World War. He prophesied the break down of the peace agreement of the War in the book The Economic Consequences of the Peace Interest and Money (1936) is regarded as one of the most influential economics books of the twentieth century. He was also a shrewd foreign currency speculator. John Maynard Keynes 1.2 CONTEXT OF THE PRESENT BOOK OF MACROECONOMICS We must remember that the subject under study has a particular historical context. We shall examine the working of the economy of a capitalist country in this book. In a capitalist country production activities are mainly carried out by capitalist enterprises. A typical capitalist enterprise has one or several entrepreneurs (people who exercise control over major decisions and bear a large part of the risk associated with the firm/enterprise). They may themselves supply the capital needed to run the enterprise, or they may borrow the capital. To carry out production they also need natural resources   a part consumed in the process of production (e.g. raw materials) and a part fixed (e.g. plots of land). And they need the most important element of human labour to carry out production. This we shall refer to as labour. After producing output with the help of these three factors of production, namely capital, land and labour, the entrepreneur sells the product in the market. The money that is earned is called revenue. Part of the revenue is paid out as rent for the service rendered by land, part of it is paid to capital as interest and part of it goes to labour as wages. The rest of the revenue is the earning of the entrepreneurs and it is called profit. Profits are often used by the producers in the next period to buy new machinery or to build new factories, so that production can be expanded. These expenses which raise productive capacity are examples of investment expenditure. In short, a capitalist economy can be defined as an economy in which most of the economic activities have the following characteristics (a) there is private ownership of means of production (b) production takes place for selling the output in the market (c) there is sale and purchase of labour services at a price which is called the wage rate (the labour which is sold and purchased against wages is referred to as If we apply the above mentioned four criteria to the countries of the world we would find that capitalist countries have come into being only during the last three to four hundred years. Moreover, strictly speaking, even at present, a handful of countries in North America, Europe and Asia will qualify as capitalist countries. In many underdeveloped countries production (in agriculture especially) is carried out by peasant families. Wage labour is seldom used and most of the labour is performed by the family members themselves. Production is not solely for the market; a great part of it is consumed by the family. Neither do many peasant farms experience significant rise in capital stock over time. In many tribal societies the ownership of land does not exist; the land may belong to the whole tribe. In such societies the analysis that we shall present in this book will not be applicable. It is, however, true that many developing countries have a significant presence of production units which are organised according to capitalist principles. The production units will be called firms in this book. In a firm the entrepreneur (or entrepreneurs) is at the helm of affairs. She hires wage labour from the market, she employs the services of capital and land as well. After hiring these inputs she undertakes the task of production. Her motive for producing goods and services (referred to as output) is to sell them in the market and earn profits. In the process she undertakes risks and uncertainties. For example, she may not get a high enough price for the goods she is producing; this may lead to fall in the profits that she earns. It is to be noted that in a capitalist country the factors of production earn their incomes through the process of production and sale of the resultant output in the market. In both the developed and developing countries, apart from the private capitalist sector, there is the institution of State. The role of the state includes framing laws, enforcing them and delivering justice. The state, in many instances, undertakes production   apart from imposing taxes and spending money on building public infrastructure, running schools, colleges, providing health services etc. These economic functions of the state have to be taken into account when we want to describe the economy of the country. For convenience we shall use the term  Government  to denote state. Apart from the firms and the government, there is another major sector in an economy which is called the household sector. By a household we mean a single individual who takes decisions relating to her own consumption, or a group of individuals for whom decisions relating to consumption are jointly determined. Households also save and pay taxes. How do they get the money for these activities? We must remember that the households consist of people. These people work in firms as workers and earn wages. They are the ones who work in the government departments and earn salaries, or they are the owners of firms and earn profits. Indeed the market in which the firms sell their products could not have been functioning without the demand coming from the households. Moreover, they can also earn rent by leasing land or earn interest by lending capital. 1. Bhaduri, A., 1990. Macroeconomics: The Dynamics of Commodity Production, pages 1   27, Macmillan India Limited, New Delhi. 2. Mankiw, N. G., 2000. Macroeconomics, pages 2   14, Macmillan Worth Publishers, New York. So far we have described the major players in the domestic economy. But all the countries of the world are also engaged in external trade. The external sector is the fourth important sector in our study. Trade with the external sector can be of two kinds 1. The domestic country may sell goods to the rest of the world. These are called exports. 2. The economy may also buy goods from the rest of the world. These are called imports. Besides exports and imports, the rest of the world affects the domestic economy in other ways as well. 3. Capital from foreign countries may flow into the domestic country, or the domestic country may be exporting capital to foreign countries. Macroeconomics deals with the aggregate economic variables of an economy. It also takes into account various interlinkages which may exist between the different sectors of an economy. This is what distinguishes it from microeconomics; which mostly examines the functioning of the particular sectors of the economy, assuming that the rest of the economy remains the same. Macroeconomics emerged as a separate subject in the 1930s due to Keynes. The Great Depression, which dealt a blow to the economies of developed countries, had provided Keynes with the inspiration for his writings. In this book we shall mostly deal with the working of a capitalist economy. Hence it may not be entirely able to capture the functioning of a developing country. Macroeconomics sees an economy as a combination of four sectors, namely households, firms, government and external sector. 1. What is the difference between microeconomics and macroeconomics? 2. What are the important features of a capitalist economy? 3. Describe the four major sectors in an economy according to the macroeconomic point of view. 4. Describe the Great Depression of 1929. Rate of interest Economic agents or units Four factors of production Means of production Capitalist country or capitalist National Income Accounting National Income Accounting National Income Accounting National Income Accounting National Income Accounting In this chapter we will introduce the fundamental functioning of a simple economy. In section 2.1 we describe some primary ideas we shall work with. In section 2.2 we describe how we can view the aggregate income of the entire economy going through the sectors of the economy in a circular way. The same section also deals with the three ways to calculate the national income; namely product method, expenditure method and income method. The last section 2.3 describes the various sub-categories of national income. It also defines different price indices like GDP deflator, Consumer Price Index, Wholesale Price Indices and discusses the problems associated with taking GDP of a country as an indicator of the aggregate welfare of the people of the country. 2.1 SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF MACROECONOMICS One of the pioneers of the subject we call in economics today, Adam Smith, named his most influential work An Enquiry into the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of Nations. What generates the economic wealth of a nation? What makes countries rich or poor? These are some of the central questions of economics. It is not that countries which are endowed with a bounty of natural wealth   minerals or forests or the most fertile lands   are naturally the richest countries. In fact the resource rich Africa and Latin America have some of the poorest countries in the world, whereas many prosperous countries have scarcely any natural wealth. There was a time when possession of natural resources was the most important consideration but even then the resource had to be transformed through a production process. The economic wealth, or well-being, of a country thus does not necessarily depend on the mere possession of resources; the point is how these resources are used in generating a flow of production and how, as a  consequence, income and wealth are generated from that process. Let us now dwell upon this flow of production. How does this flow of production arise? People combine their energies with natural and manmade environment within a certain social and technological structure to generate a flow of production. In our modern economic setting this flow of production arises out of production of commodities   goods and services by millions of enterprises large and small. These enterprises range from giant corporations employing a large number of people to single entrepreneur enterprises. But what happens to these commodities after being produced? Each producer of commodities intends to sell her output. So from the smallest items like pins or buttons to the largest ones like aeroplanes, automobiles, giant machinery or any saleable service like that of the doctor, the lawyer or the financial the goods and services produced are to be sold to the consumers. The consumer may, in turn, be an individual or an enterprise and the good or service purchased by that entity might be for final use or for use in further production. When it is used in further production it often loses its characteristic as that specific good and is transformed through a productive process into another good. Thus a farmer producing cotton sells it to a spinning mill where the raw cotton undergoes transformation to yarn; the yarn is, in turn, sold to a textile mill where, through the productive process, it is transformed into cloth; the cloth is, in turn, transformed through another productive process into an article of clothing which is then ready to be sold finally to the consumers for final use. Such an item that is meant for final use and will not pass through any more stages of production or transformations is called a final good. Why do we call this a final good? Because once it has been sold it passes out of the active economic flow. It will not undergo any further transformation at the hands of any producer. It may, however, undergo transformation by the action of the ultimate purchaser. In fact many such final goods are transformed during their consumption. Thus the tea leaves purchased by the consumer are not consumed in that form   they are used to make drinkable tea, which is consumed. Similarly most of the items that enter our kitchen are transformed through the process of cooking. But cooking at home is not an economic activity, even though the product involved undergoes transformation. Home cooked food is not sold to the market. However, if the same cooking or tea brewing was done in a restaurant where the cooked product would be sold to customers, then the same items, such as tea leaves, would cease to be final goods and would be counted as inputs to which economic value addition can take place. Thus it is not in the nature of the good but in the economic nature of its use that a good becomes a final good. Of the final goods, we can distinguish between consumption goods and capital goods. Goods like food and clothing, and services like recreation that are consumed when purchased by their ultimate consumers are called consumption goods or consumer goods. (This also includes services which are consumed but for convenience we may refer to them as consumer goods.) Then there are other goods that are of durable character which are used in the production process. These are tools, implements and machines. While they make production of other commodities feasible, they themselves don t get transformed in the production process. They are also final goods yet they are not final goods to be ultimately consumed. Unlike the final goods that we have considered above, they are the crucial backbone of any production process, in aiding and enabling the production to take place. These goods form a part of capital, one of the crucial factors of production in which a productive enterprise has invested, and they continue to enable the production process to go on for continuous cycles of production. These are capital goods and they gradually undergo wear and tear, and thus are repaired or gradually replaced over time. The stock of capital that an economy possesses is thus preserved, maintained and renewed partially or wholly over time and this is of some importance in the discussion that will follow. National Income Accounting We may note here that some commodities like television sets, automobiles or home computers, although they are for ultimate consumption, have one characteristic in common with capital goods they are also durable. That is, they are not extinguished by immediate or even short period consumption; they have a relatively long life as compared to articles such as food or even clothing. They also undergo wear and tear with gradual use and often need repairs and replacements of parts, i.e., like machines they also need to be preserved, maintained and renewed. That is why we call these goods Thus if we consider all the final goods and services produced in an economy in a given period of time they are either in the form of consumption goods (both durable and non-durable) or capital goods. As final goods they do not undergo any further transformation in the economic process. Of the total production taking place in the economy a large number of products don t end up in final consumption and are not capital goods either. Such goods may be used by other producers as material inputs. Examples are steel sheets used for making automobiles and copper used for making utensils. These are intermediate goods, mostly used as raw material or inputs for production of other commodities. These are not final goods. Now, to have a comprehensive idea of the total flow of production in the economy, we need to have a quantitative measure of the aggregate level of final goods produced in the economy. However, in order to get a quantitative assessment   a measure of the total final goods and services produced in the economy   it is obvious that we need a common measuring rod. We cannot add metres of cloth produced to tonnes of rice or number of automobiles or machines. Our common measuring rod is money. Since each of these commodities is produced for sale, the sum total of the monetary value of these diverse commodities gives us a measure of final output. But why are we to measure final goods only? Surely intermediate goods are crucial inputs to any production process and a significant part of our manpower and capital stock are engaged in production of these goods. However, since we are dealing with value of output, we should realise that the value of the final goods already includes the value of the intermediate goods that have entered into their production as inputs. Counting them separately will lead to the error of double counting. Whereas considering intermediate goods may give a fuller description of total economic activity, counting them will highly exaggerate the final value of our economic activity. At this stage it is important to introduce the concepts of stocks and flows. Often we hear statements like the average salary of someone is Rs 10,000 or the output of the steel industry is so many tonnes or so many rupees in value. But these are incomplete statements because it is not clear whether the income which is being referred to is yearly or monthly or daily income and surely that makes a huge difference. Sometimes, when the context is familiar, we assume that the time period is known and therefore do not mention it. But inherent in all such statements is a definite period of time. Otherwise such statements are meaningless. Thus income, or output, or profits are concepts that make sense only when a time period is specified. These are called flows because they occur in a period of time. Therefore we need to delineate a time period to get a quantitative measure of these. Since a lot of accounting is done annually in an economy, many of these are expressed annually like annual profits or production. Flows are defined over a period of time. In contrast, capital goods or consumer durables once produced do not wear out or get consumed in a delineated time period. In fact capital goods continue to serve us through different cycles of production. The buildings or machines in a factory are there irrespective of the specific time period. There can be addition to, or deduction from, these if a new machine is added or a machine falls in disuse and is not replaced. These are called stocks. Stocks are defined at a particular point of time. However we can measure a change in stock over a specific period of time like how many machines were added this year. Such changes in stocks are thus flows, which can be measured over specific time periods. A particular machine can be part of the capital stock for many years (unless it wears out); but that machine can be part of the flow of new machines added to the capital stock only for a single year when it was initially installed. To further understand the difference between stock variables and flow variables, let us take the following example. Suppose a tank is being filled with water coming from a tap. The amount of water which is flowing into the tank from the tap per minute is a flow. But how much water there is in the tank at a particular point of time is a stock concept. To come back to our discussion on the measure of final output, that part of our final output that comprises of capital goods constitutes gross investment of an economy1. These may be machines, tools and implements; buildings, office spaces, storehouses or infrastructure like roads, bridges, airports or jetties. But all the capital goods produced in a year do not constitute an addition to the capital stock already existing. A significant part of current output of capital goods goes in maintaining or replacing part of the existing stock of capital goods. This is because the already existing capital stock suffers wear and tear and needs maintenance and replacement. A part of the capital goods produced this year goes for replacement of existing capital goods and is not an addition to the stock of capital goods already existing and its value needs to be subtracted from gross investment for arriving at the measure for net investment. This deletion, which is made from the value of gross investment in order to accommodate regular wear and tear of capital, is called depreciation. So new addition to capital stock in an economy is measured by net investment or new capital formation, which is expressed as Net Investment = Gross investment   Depreciation Let us examine this concept called depreciation a little more in detail. Let us consider a new machine that a firm invests in. This machine may be in service for the next twenty years after which it falls into disrepair and needs to be replaced. We can now imagine as if the machine is being gradually used up in each year s production process and each year one twentieth of its original value is getting depreciated. So, instead of considering a bulk investment for replacement after twenty years, we consider an annual depreciation cost every year. This is the usual sense in which the term depreciation is used and inherent in its conception is the expected life of a particular capital good, like twenty years in our example of the machine. Depreciation is thus an annual allowance for wear and tear of a 1This is how economists define investment. This must not be confused with the commonplace notion of investment which implies using money to buy physical or financial assets. Thus use of the term investment to denote purchase of shares or property or even having an insurance policy has nothing to do with how economists define investment. Investment for us is always capital formation, a gross or net addition to capital stock. National Income Accounting capital good.2 In other words it is the cost of the good divided by number of years of its useful life.3 Notice here that depreciation is an accounting concept. No real expenditure may have actually been incurred each year yet depreciation is annually accounted for. In an economy with thousands of enterprises with widely varying periods of life of their equipment, in any particular year, some enterprises are actually making the bulk replacement spending. Thus, we can realistically assume that there will be a steady flow of actual replacement spending which will more or less match the amount of annual depreciation being accounted for in that economy. Now if we go back to our discussion of total final output produced in an economy, we see that there is output of consumer goods and services and output of capital goods. The consumer goods sustain the consumption of the entire population of the economy. Purchase of consumer goods depends on the capacity of the people to spend on these goods which, in turn, depends on their income. The other part of the final goods, the capital goods, are purchased by business enterprises. They are used either for maintenance of the capital stock because there are wear and tear of it, or they are used for addition to their capital stock. In a specific time period, say in a year, thetotal production of final goods can thus be either in the form of consumption or investment. This implies that there is a trade-off. If an economy, produces more of consumer goods, it is producing less of capital goods and vice- It is generally observed that more sophisticated and heavy capital goods raise the ability of a labourer to produce goods. The traditional weaver would take months to weave a sari but with modern machinery thousands of pieces of clothing are produced in a day. Decades were taken to construct the great historical monuments like the Pyramids or the Taj Mahal but with modern construction machinery one can build a skyscraper in a few years. More production of newer varities of capital goods therefore would help in the greater production of consumer goods. But aren t we contradicting ourselves? Earlier we have seen how, of the total output of final goods of an economy, if a larger share goes for production of capital goods, a smaller share is available for production of consumer goods. And now we are saving more capital goods would mean more consumer goods. There is no contradiction here however. What is important here is the element of time. At a particular period, given a level of total output of the economy, it is true if more capital goods are produced less of consumer goods would be produced. But production of more capital goods would mean that in future the labourers would have more capital equipments to work with. We have seen that this leads to a higher capacity of the economy to produce with the same number of labourers. Thus total input itself would be higher compared to the case when less capital goods were produced. If total output is higher the amount of consumer goods that can be produced would surely be higher. 2Depreciation does not take into account unexpected or sudden destruction or disuse of capital as can happen with accidents, natural calamities or other such extraneous circumstances. 3We are making a rather simple assumption here that there is a constant rate of depreciation based on the original value of the asset. There can be other methods to calculate depreciation in Thus the economic cycle not only rolls on, higher production of capital goods enables the economy to expand. It is possible to find another view of the circular flow in the discussion we have made so far. Since we are dealing with all goods and services that are produced for the market, the crucial factor enabling such sale is demand for such products backed by purchasing power. One must have the necessary ability to purchase commodities. Otherwise one s need for commodities does not get recognised by We have already discussed above that one s ability to buy commodities comes from the income one earns as labourer (earning wages), or as entrepreneur (earning profits), or as landlord (earning rents), or as owner of capital (earning interests). In short, the incomes that people earn as owners of factors of production are used by them to meet their demand for goods and services. So we can see a circular flow here which is facilitated through the market. Simply put, the firms  demand for factors of production to run the production process creates payments to the public. In turn, the public s demand for goods and services creates payments to the firms and enables the sale of the products So the social act of consumption and production are intricately linked and, in fact, there is a circular causation here. The process of production in an economy generates factor payments for those involved in production and generates goods and services as the outcome of the production process. The incomes so generated create the capacity to purchase the final consumption goods and thus enable their sale by the business enterprises, the basic object of their production. The capital goods which are also generated in the production process also enable their producers to earn income   wages, profits etc. in a similar manner. The capital goods add to, or maintain, the capital stock of an economy and thus make production of other commodities possible. 2.2 CIRCULAR FLOW OF INCOME AND METHODS OF CALCULATING NATIONAL INCOME The description of the economy in the previous section enables us to have a rough idea of how a simple economy   without a government, external trade or any savings   may function. The households receive their payments from the firms for productive activities they perform for the latter. As we have mentioned before, there may fundamentally be four kinds of contributions that can be made during the production of goods and services (a) contribution made by human labour, remuneration for which is called wage (b) contribution made by capital, remuneration for which is called interest (c) contribution made by entrepreneurship, remuneration of which is profit (d) contribution made by fixed natural resources (called  land ), remuneration for which is called rent. In this simplified economy, there is only one way in which the households may dispose off their earnings   by spending their entire income on the goods and services produced by the domestic firms. The other channels of disposing their income are closed: we have assumed that the households do not save, they do not pay taxes to the government   since there is no government, and neither do they buy imported goods since there is no external trade in this simple economy. In other words, factors of production use their remunerations to buy the goods and  services which they assisted in producing. The aggregate consumption by the households of the economy is equal to the aggregate expenditure on goods and services produced by the firms in the economy. The National Income Accounting entire income of the economy, therefore, comes back to the producers in the form of sales revenue. There is no leakage from the system   there is no difference between the amount that the firms had distributed in the form of factor payments (which is the sum total of remunerations earned by the four factors of production) and the aggregate consumption expenditure that they receive as In the next period the firms will once again produce goods remunerations to the factors of production. These remunerations will once again be used to buy the goods and services. Hence year after year we can imagine the aggregate income of the economy going through the two sectors, firms and households, in a circular way. This is represented in Fig. 2.1. When the income is being spent on the goods and services produced by the firms, it takes the form of aggregate expenditure received by the firms. Since the value of expenditure must be equal to the value of goods and services, we can equivalently measure the aggregate income by  calculating the aggregate value of goods and services produced by the firms. When the aggregate revenue received by the firms is paid out to the factors of production it takes the form of aggregate income. In Fig. 2.1, the uppermost arrow, going from the households to the firms, represents the spending the households undertake to buy goods and services produced by the firms. The second arrow going from the firms to the households is the counterpart of the arrow above. It stands for the goods and services which are flowing from the firms to the households. In other words, this flow is what the households are getting from the firms, for which they are making the expenditures. In short, the two arrows on the top represent the goods and services market   the arrow above represents the flow of payments for the goods and services, the arrow below represents the flow of goods and services. The two arrows at the bottom of the diagram similarly represent the factors of production market. The lower most arrow going from the households to the firms symbolises the services that the households are rendering to the firms. Using these services the firms are manufacturing the output. The arrow above this, going from the firms to the households, represents the payments made by the firms to the households for the services provided by the latter. Since the same amount of money, representing the aggregate value of goods and services, is moving in a circular way, if we want to estimate the aggregate value of goods and services produced during a year we can measure the annual value of the flows at any of the dotted lines indicated in the diagram. We can measure the uppermost flow (at point  A) by measuring the aggregate value of spending that the firms receive for the final goods and services which they produce. This method will be called the expenditure method. If we measure the flow at B by measuring the aggregate value of final goods and services produced by all Fig. 2.1: Circular Flow of Income in a Simple Economy the firms, it will be called product method. At C, measuring the sum total of all factor payments will be called income method. Observe that the aggregate spending of the economy must be equal to the aggregate income earned by the factors of production (the flows are equal at A and C). Now let us suppose that at a particular period of time the households decide to spend more on the goods and services produced by the firms. For the time being let us ignore the question where they would find the money to finance that extra spending since they are already spending all of their income (they may have borrowed the money to finance the additional spending). Now if they spend more on the goods and services, the firms will produce more goods and services to meet this extra demand. Since they will produce more, the firms must also pay the factors of production extra remunerations. How much extra amount of money will the firms pay? The additional factor payments must be equal to the value of the additional goods and services that are being produced. Thus the households will eventually get the extra earnings required to support the initial additional spending that they had undertaken. In other words, the households can decide to spend more   spend beyond their means. And in the end their income will rise exactly by the amount which is necessary to carry out the extra spending. Putting it differently, an economy may decide to spend more than the present level of income. But by doing so, its income will eventually rise to a level consistent with the higher spending level. This may seem a little paradoxical at first. But since income is moving in a circular fashion, it is not difficult to figure out that a rise in the flow at one point must eventually lead to a rise in the flow at all levels. This is one more example of how the functioning of a single economic agent (say, a household) may differ from the functioning of the economy as a whole. In the former the spending gets restricted by the individual income of a household. It can never happen that a single worker decides to spend more and this leads to an equivalent rise in her income. We shall spend more time on how higher aggregate spending leads to change in aggregate income in a later chapter. The above mentioned sketchy illustration of an economy is admittedly a simplified one. Such a story which describes the functioning of an imaginary economy is called a macroeconomic model. It is clear that a model does not describe an actual economy in detail. For example, our model assumes that households do not save, there is no government, no trade with other countries. However models do not want to capture an economy in its every minute detail   their purpose is to highlight some essential features of the functioning of an economic system. But one has to be cautious not to simplify the matters in such a way that misrepresents the essential nature of the economy. The subject of economics is full of models, many of which will be presented in this book. One task of an economist is to figure out which model is applicable to which real life situation. If we change our simple model described above and introduce savings, will it change the principal conclusion that the aggregate estimate of the income of the economy will remain the same whether we decide to calculate it at A, B or C? It turns out that this conclusion does not change in a fundamental way. No matter how complicated an economic system may be, the annual production of goods and services estimated through each of the three methods is the same. We have seen that the aggregate value of goods and services produced in an economy can be calculated by three methods. We now discuss the detailed steps of these calculations. National Income Accounting 2.2.1 The Product or Value Added Method In product method we calculate the aggregate annual value of goods and services produced (if a year is the unit of time). How to go about doing this? Do we add up the value of all goods and services produced by all the firms in an economy? The following example will help us to understand. Let us suppose that there are only two kinds of producers in the economy. They are the wheat producers (or the farmers) and the bread makers (the bakers). The wheat producers grow wheat and they do not need any input other than human labour. They sell a part of the wheat to the bakers. The bakers do not need any other raw materials besides wheat to produce bread. Let us suppose that in a year the total value of wheat that the farmers have produced is Rs 100. Out of this they have sold Rs 50 worth of wheat to the bakers. The bakers have used this amount of wheat completely during the year and have produced Rs 200 worth of bread. What is the value of total production in the economy? If we follow the simple way of aggregating the values of production of the sectors, we would add Rs 200 (value of production of the bakers) to Rs 100 (value of production of farmers). The result will be Rs 300. A little reflection will tell us that the value of aggregate production is not Rs 300. The farmers had produced Rs 100 worth of wheat for which it did not need assistance of any inputs. Therefore the entire Rs 100 is rightfully the contribution of the farmers. But the same is not true for the bakers. The bakers had to buy Rs 50 worth of wheat to produce their bread. The Rs 200 worth of bread that they have produced is not entirely their own contribution. To calculate the net contribution of the bakers, we need to subtract the value of the wheat that they have bought from the farmers. If we do not do this we shall commit the mistake of  double counting. This is because Rs 50 worth of wheat will be counted twice. First it will be counted as part of the output produced by the farmers. Second time, it will be counted as the imputed value of wheat in the bread produced by Therefore, the net contribution made by the bakers is, Rs 200   Rs 50 = Rs 150. Hence, aggregate value of goods produced by this simple economy is Rs 100 (net contribution by the farmers) + Rs 150 (net contribution by the bakers) = Rs 250. The term that is used to denote the net contribution made by a firm is called its value added. We have seen that the raw materials that a firm buys from another firm which are completely used up in the process of production are called  intermediate goods. Therefore the value added of a firm is, value of production of the firm   value used by the firm. The value added of a firm is distributed among its four factors of entrepreneurship and land. Therefore wages, interest, profits and rents paid out by the firm must add up to the value added of the firm. Value added is a We can represent the example given above in terms of Intermediate goods used 200   50 =150 Table 2.1: Production, Intermediate Goods and Value Added Here all the variables are expressed in terms of money. We can think of the market prices of the goods being used to evaluate the different variables listed here. And we can introduce more players in the chain of production in the example and make it more realistic and complicated. For example, the farmer may be using fertilisers or pesticides to produce wheat. The value of these inputs will have to be deducted from the value of output of wheat. Or the bakers may be selling the bread to a restaurant whose value added will have to be calculated by subtracting the value of intermediate goods (bread in this case). We have already introduced the concept of depreciation, which is also known as consumption of fixed capital. Since the capital which is used to carry out production undergoes wear and tear, the producer has to undertake replacement investments to keep the value of capital constant. The replacement investment is same as depreciation of capital. If we include depreciation in value added then the measure of value added that we obtain is called Gross Value Added. If we deduct the value of depreciation from gross value added we obtain Net Value Added. Unlike gross value added, net value added does not include wear and tear that capital has undergone. For example, let us say a firm produces Rs 100 worth of goods per year, Rs 20 is the value of intermediate goods used by it during the year and Rs 10 is the value of capital consumption. The gross value added of the firm will be, Rs 100   Rs 20 = Rs 80 per year. The net value added will be, Rs 100   Rs 20   Rs 10 = Rs 70 per year. It is to be noted that while calculating the value added we are taking the value of production of firm. But a firm may be unable to sell all of its produce. In such a case it will have some unsold stock at the end of the year. Conversely, it may so happen that a firm had some initial unsold stock to begin with. During the year that follows it has produced very little. But it has met the demand in the market by selling from the stock it had at the beginning of the year. How shall we treat these stocks which a firm may intentionally or unintentionally carry with itself? Also, let us remember that a firm buys raw materials from other firms. The part of raw material which gets used up is categorised as an intermediate good. What happens to the part which does not get used up? In economics, the stock of unsold finished goods, or semi-finished goods, or raw materials which a firm carries from one year to the next is called inventory. Inventory is a stock variable. It may have a value at the beginning of the year; it may have a higher value at the end of the year. In such a case inventories have increased (or accumulated). If the value of inventories is less at the end of the year compared to the beginning of the year, inventories have decreased (decumulated). We can therefore infer that the change of inventories of a firm during a year   production of the firm during the year   sale of the firm during the year. The sign   stands for identity. Unlike equality ( = ), an identity always holds irrespective of what variables we have on the left hand and right hand sides of it. For example, we can write 2 + 2   4, because this is always true. But we must write 2    x = 4. This is because two times x equals to 4 for a particular value of x, (namely when x = 2) and not always. We cannot write 2    x   4. Observe that since production of the firm   value added + intermediate goods used by the firm, we get, change of inventories of a firm during a year   value added + intermediate goods used by the firm   sale of the firm during For example, let us suppose that a firm had an unsold stock worth of Rs 100 at the beginning of a year. During the year it had produced Rs 1,000 National Income Accounting worth of goods and managed to sell Rs 800 worth of goods. Therefore, the Rs 200 is the difference between production and sales. This Rs 200 worth of goods is the change in inventories. This will add to the Rs 100 worth of inventories the firm started with. Hence the inventories at the end of the year is, Rs 100 + Rs 200 = Rs 300. Notice that change in inventories takes place over a period of time. Therefore it is a flow variable. Inventories are treated as capital. Addition to the stock of capital of a firm is known as investment. Therefore, change in the inventory of a firm is treated as investment. There can be three major categories of investment. First is the rise in the value of inventories of a firm over a year which is treated as investment expenditure undertaken by the firm. The second category of investment is the fixed business investment, which is defined as the addition to the machinery, factory buildings and equipment employed by the firms. The last category of investment is the residential investment, which refers to the addition of housing facilities. Change in inventories may be planned or unplanned. In case of an unexpected fall in sales, the firm will have unsold stock of goods which it had not anticipated. Hence there will be unplanned accumulation of inventories. In the opposite case where there is unexpected rise in the sales there will be unplanned decumulation of inventories. This can be illustrated with the help of the following example. Suppose a firm produces shirts. It starts the year with an inventory of 100 shirts. During the coming year it expects to sell 1,000 shirts. Hence, it produces 1,000 shirts, expecting to keep an inventory of 100 at the end of the year. However, during the year, the sales of shirts turn out to be unexpectedly low. The firm is able to sell only 600 shirts. This means that the firm is left with 400 unsold shirts. The firm ends the year with 400 + 100 = 500 shirts. The unexpected rise of inventories by 400 will be an example of unplanned accumulation of inventories. If, on the other hand, the sales had been more than 1,000 we would have unplanned decumulation of inventories. For example, if the sales had been 1,050, then not only the production of 1,000 shirts will be sold, the firm will have to sell 50 shirts out of the inventory. This 50 unexpected reduction in inventories is an example of unexpected decumulation of What can be the examples of planned accumulation or decumulation of inventories? Suppose the firm wants to raise the inventories from 100 shirts to 200 shirts during the year. Expecting sales of 1,000 shirts during the year (as before), the firm produces 1000 + 100 = 1,100 shirts. If the sales are actually 1,000 shirts, then the firm indeed ends up with a rise of inventories. The new stock of inventories is 200 shirts, which was indeed planned by the firm. This rise is an example of planned accumulation of inventories. On the other hand if the firm had wanted to reduce the inventories from 100 to 25 (say), then it would produce 1000   75 = 925 shirts. This is because it plans to sell 75 shirts out of the inventory of 100 shirts it started with (so that the inventory at the end of the year becomes 100   75 = 25 shirts, which the firm wants). If the sales indeed turn out to be 1000 as expected by the firm, the firm will be left with the planned, reduced inventory of 25 shirts. We shall have more to say on the distinction between unplanned and planned change in inventories in the chapters which follow. is a notation   it is used to denote summation. Suppose, there are 3 students, having pocket money  of Rs. 200, 250 and 350 respectively. We can say, if student has pocket money X, then,. The total pocket money will be given by. The summation notation given above is useful in writing it in a shorter form: can be written as, which means that there are three values of X  corresponding to the three individuals 1 to 3, and we are referring to the sum of the values of X  for individuals 1 to 3. This notation is particularly useful in macroeconomics since we deal with aggregates. For instance, suppose there are 1000 consumers in the economy,. If we want to compute the aggregate consumption for this economy, we have to add up all these values, which means aggregate consumption for this economy will be given by. The summation notation, however, allows us to write it in a much shorter form. Since we are summing up the values of consumption for individual 1 to individual 1000, where the value of Taking cognizance of change of inventories we may write Gross value added of firm, i (GV Ai)   Gross value of the output produced by the firm i (Qi)   Value of intermediate goods used by the firm (Zi) GV Ai   Value of sales by the firm (Vi) + Value of change in inventories (Ai)   Value of intermediate goods used by the firm (Zi) Equation (2.1) has been derived by using: Change in inventories of a firm during a year   Production of the firm during the year   Sale of the firm during the year. It is worth noting that the sales by the firm includes sales not only to domestic buyers but also to buyers abroad (the latter is termed as exports). It is also to be noted that all the above mentioned variables are flow variables. Generally these are measured on an annual basis. Hence they measure value of the flows per year. Net value added of the firm i   GVAi   Depreciation of the firm i (Di) If we sum the gross value added of all the firms of the economy in a year, we get a measure of the value of aggregate amount of goods and services produced by the economy in a year (just as we had done in the wheat-bread example). Such an estimate is called Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Thus GDP   Sum total of gross value added of all the firms in the economy. If there are N firms in the economy, each assigned with a serial number from 1 to N, then GDP   Sum total of the gross value added of all the firms in   GVA1 + GVA2 +..... + GVAN National Income Accounting 2.2.2 Expenditure Method An alternative way to calculate the GDP is by looking at the demand side of the products. This method is referred to as the expenditure method. In the farmer- baker example that we have described before, the aggregate value of the output in the economy by expenditure method will be calculated in the following way. In this method we add the final expenditures that each firm makes. Final expenditure is that part of expenditure which is undertaken not for intermediate purposes. The Rs 50 worth of wheat which the bakers buy from the farmers counts as intermediate goods, hence it does not fall under the category of final expenditure. Therefore the aggregate value of output of the economy is Rs 200 (final expenditure received by the baker) + Rs 50 (final expenditure received by the farmer) = Rs 250 per year. Firm i can make the final expenditure on the following accounts (a) the final consumption expenditure on the goods and services produced by the firm. We shall denote this by Ci. We may note that mostly it is the households which undertake consumption expenditure. There may be exceptions when the firms buy consumables to treat their guests or for their employees (b) the final investment expenditure, Ii, incurred by other firms on the capital goods produced by firm i. Observe that unlike the expenditure on intermediate goods which is not included in the calculation of GDP, expenditure on investments is included. The reason is that investment goods remain with the firm, whereas intermediate goods are consumed in the process of production (c) the expenditure that the government makes on the final goods and services produced by firm i. We shall denote this by Gi. We may point out that the final expenditure incurred by the government includes both the consumption and investment expenditure (d) the export revenues that firm i earns by selling its goods and services abroad. This will be denoted by Xi. Thus the sum total of the revenues that the firm i earns is given by RVi   Sum total of final consumption, investment, government and exports expenditures received by the firm i   Ci + Ii + Gi + Xi If there are N firms then summing over N firms we get RV    Sum total of final consumption, investment, government and exports expenditures received by all the firms in the economy Let C be the aggregate final consumption expenditure of the entire economy. Notice that a part of C is spent on imports of consumption goods C consumption for the individual i is ci, aggregate consumption will be In general, if we are taking sum of a quantity x  over individuals 1 to n, it will be denoted by C + Cm. Let Cm denote expenditure on the imports of consumption goods. Therefore C   Cm denotes that part of aggregate final consumption expenditure that is spent on the domestic firms. Similarly, let I   Im stand for that part of aggregate final investment expenditure that is spent on domestic firms, where I is the value of the aggregate final investment expenditure of the economy and out of this I m is spent on foreign investment goods. Similarly G   Gm stands for that part of aggregate final government expenditure that is spent on the domestic firms, where G is the aggregate expenditure of the government of the economy and Gm is the part of G which is spent on imports. C    Sum total of final consumption expenditures received by all the firms in the economy   C   Cm; I    Sum total of final investment expenditures received by all the firms in the economy   I   Im; G    Sum total of final government expenditures received by all the firms in the economy   G   Gm. Substituting these in equation (2.3) we get RV   C   Cm + I   Im + G   Gm +   C + I + G + X    (Cm + Im + Gm)   C + I + G + X   M Here X   X  denotes aggregate expenditure by the foreigners on the exports of the economy. M   Cm + Im + Gm is the aggregate imports expenditure incurred by the economy. We know, GDP    Sum total of all the final expenditure received by the firms in the economy. In other words RV    C +   + G + X   M Equation (2.4) expresses GDP according to the expenditure method. It may be noted that out of the five variables on the right hand side, investment expenditure, I, is the most unstable. 2.2.3 Income Method As we mentioned in the beginning, the sum of final expenditures in the economy must be equal to the incomes received by all the factors of production taken together (final expenditure is the spending on final goods, it does not include spending on intermediate goods). This follows from the simple idea that the revenues earned by all the firms put together must be distributed among the factors of production as salaries, wages, profits, interest earnings and rents. Let there be M number of households in the economy. Let Wi be the wages and salaries received by the i-th household in a particular year. Similarly, Pi, Ini, Ri be the gross profits, interest payments and rents received by the i-th household in a particular year. Therefore, GDP is given by R    W + P + In + R W    W, P    P, R    R. National Income Accounting Taking equations (2.2), (2.4) and (2.5) together we get GV A    C + I + G + X   M   W + P + In + R It is to be noted that in identity (2.6), I stands for sum total of both planned and unplanned investments undertaken by the firms. Since, the identities (2.2), (2.4) and (2.6) are different expressions of the same variable, namely GDP, we may represent the equivalence by Fig. 2.2. Now, let us look at a numerical example to see how all the three methods of estimating GDP give us the same Example: There are two firms, A and B. Suppose A uses no raw material and produces cotton worth Rs. 50. A sells its cotton to firm B, who uses it to produce cloth. B sells the cloth produced to consumers for Rs. 200. 1. GDP in the phase of production or the value added method: Recall that value added (VA) = Sales   Intermediate Goods VAA = 50 - 0 = 50 VAB = 200 - 50 = 150 GDP = VAA + VAB = 200. Table 2.2: Distributions of GDPs for firms A and B Fig. 2.2: Diagramtic Representation of GDP by the Three Methods Firm A       Firm B 2. GDP in the phase of disposition or the expenditure method: Recall that GDP = Sum of final expenditure or expenditures on goods and services for end use. In the above case, final expenditure is expenditure by consumers on cloth. Therefore, GDP = 200. 3. GDP in the phase of distribution or Income method Let us look at the firms A and B again. Now, of this 50 received by A, the firm gives Rs. 20 to the workers as wages, and keeps the remaining 30 as its profits. Similarly, B gives 60 as wages and keeps 90 as profits. 4 In this example, we have left out factor payments in the form of rent and interest. But this will not make any difference to the basic result, because after paying wages the remainder of value added by a firm will be distributed between rent, interest and profits (together called operating Table 2.3: Distributions of factor incomes of firms A and B Firm A       Firm B Recall that GDP by income method = sum total of factor incomes, which is equal to total wages received (workers of A and B) and total profits earned (by A and B), which is equal4 to 80 + 120 = 200. 2.2.4 Factor Cost, Basic Prices and Market Prices In India, the most highlighted measure of national income has been the GDP at factor cost. The Central Statistics Office (CSO) of the Government of India has been reporting the GDP at factor cost and at market prices. In its revision in January 2015 the CSO replaced GDP at factor cost with the GVA at basic prices, and the GDP at market prices, which is now called only GDP, is now the most The idea of GVA has already been discussed: it is the value of total output produced in the economy less the value of intermediate consumption (the output which is used in production of output further, and not used in final consumption). Here we discuss the concept of basic prices. The distinction between factor cost, basic prices and market prices is based on the distinction between net production taxes (production taxes less production subsidies) and net product taxes (product taxes less product subsidies). Production taxes and subsidies are paid or received in relation to production and are independent of the volume of production such as land revenues, stamp and registration fee. Product taxes and subsidies, on the other hand, are paid or received per unit or product, e.g., excise tax, service tax, export and import duties etc. Factor cost includes only the payment to factors of production, it does not include any tax. In order to arrive at the market prices, we have to add to the factor cost the total indirect taxes less total subsidies. The basic prices lie in between: they include the production taxes (less production subsidies) but not product taxes (less product subsidies). Therefore in order to arrive at market prices we have to add product taxes (less product subsidies) to the basic prices. As stated above, now the CSO releases GVA at basic prices. Thus, it includes the net production taxes but not net product taxes. In order to arrive at the GDP (at market prices) we need to add net product taxes to GVA at basic prices. GVA at factor costs + Net production taxes = GVA at GVA at basic prices + Net product taxes = GVA at Table 2.5 at the end of the chapter gives the figures for GDP (at market prices) and GVA at basic prices, while Table 2.6 gives the composition of GDP from National Income Accounting 2.3 SOME MACROECONOMIC IDENTITIES Gross Domestic Product measures the aggregate production of final goods and services taking place within the domestic economy during a year. But the whole of it may not accrue to the citizens of the country. For example, a citizen of India working in Saudi Arabia may be earning her wage and it will be included in the Saudi Arabian GDP. But legally speaking, she is an Indian. Is there a way to take into account the earnings made by Indians abroad or by the factors of production owned by Indians? When we try to do this, in order to maintain symmetry, we must deduct the earnings of the foreigners who are working within our domestic economy, or the payments to the factors of production owned by the foreigners. For example, the profits earned by the Korean-owned Hyundai car factory will have to be subtracted from the GDP of India. variable which takes into account such known as Gross (GNP). It is, therefore, defined as follows GNP   GDP + Factor income earned by the domestic factors of production employed in the rest of the world   Factor income earned by the factors of production of the rest of the world employed in the domestic economy Hence, GNP   GDP + Net factor income from abroad (Net factor income from abroad = Factor income earned by the domestic factors of production employed in the rest of the world   Factor income earned by the factors of production of the rest of the world employed in the domestic economy). We have already noted that a part of the capital gets consumed during the year due to wear and tear. This wear and tear is called depreciation. Naturally, depreciation does not become part of anybody s income. If we deduct depreciation from GNP the measure of aggregate income that we obtain is called Net National Product (NNP). Thus NNP   GNP   Depreciation It is to be noted that all these variables are evaluated at market prices. Through the expression given above, we get the value of NNP evaluated at market prices. But market price includes indirect taxes. When indirect taxes are imposed on goods and services, their prices go up. Indirect taxes accrue to the government. We have to deduct them from NNP evaluated at market prices in order to calculate that part of NNP which actually accrues to the factors of production. Similarly, there may be subsidies granted by the government on the prices of some commodities (in India petrol is heavily taxed by the government, whereas cooking gas is subsidised). So we need to add  subsidies to the NNP evaluated at market prices. The measure that we obtain by doing so is called Net National Product at factor cost or National Income. Thus, NNP at factor cost   National Income (NI )   NNP at market prices   (Indirect taxes   Subsidies)   NNP at market prices   Net indirect taxes (Net indirect taxes   Indirect taxes   Subsidies) The foreigners have a share in your domestic economy. Discuss this in the classroom. We can further subdivide the National Income into smaller categories. Let us try to find the expression for the part of NI which is received by households. We shall call this Personal Income (PI). First, let us note that out of NI, which is earned by the firms and government enterprises, a part of profit is not distributed among the factors of production. This is called Undistributed Profits (UP). We have to deduct UP from NI to arrive at PI, since UP does not accrue to the households. Similarly, Corporate Tax, which is imposed on the earnings made by the firms, will also have to be deducted from the NI, since it does not accrue to the households. On the other hand, the households do receive interest payments from private firms or the government on past loans advanced by them. And households may have to pay interests to the firms and the government as well, in case they had borrowed money from either. So, we have to deduct the net interests paid by the households to the firms and government. The households receive transfer payments from government and firms (pensions, scholarship, prizes, for example) which have to be added to calculate the Personal Income of the households. Thus, Personal Income (PI)   NI   Undistributed profits   Net interest payments made by households   Corporate tax + Transfer payments to the households from the government and firms. However, even PI is not the income over which the households have complete say. They have to pay taxes from PI. If we deduct the Personal Tax Payments (income tax, for example) and Non-tax Payments (such as fines) from PI, we obtain what is known as the Personal Disposable Income. Thus Personal Disposable Income (PDI )   PI   Personal tax payments   Non-tax Personal Disposable Income is the part of the aggregate income which belongs to the households. They may decide to consume a part of it, and save the rest. In Fig. 2.3 we present a diagrammatic representation of the relations between these major macroeconomic variables. ID - Sub UP + NIH + CT   National Disposable Income and Private Income Apart from these categories of aggregate macroeconomic variables, in India, a few other aggregate income categories are also used in National Income National Disposable Income = Net National Product at market prices + Other current transfers from the rest of the world The idea behind National Disposable Income is that it gives an idea of Fig. 2.3: Diagrammatic representation of the subcategories of aggregate income. NFIA: Net Factor Income from Abroad, D: Depreciation, ID: Indirect Taxes, Sub: Subsidies, UP: Undistributed Profits, NIH: Net Interest Payments by Households, CT: Corporate Taxes, TrH: Transfers recived by Households, PTP: Personal Tax Payments, NP: Non-Tax Payments. National Income Accounting Table 2.4: Basic National Income Aggregates5 GDP is the market value of all final goods and services produced within a domestic territory of a country measured in a year. All production done by the national residents or the non-residents in a country gets included, regardless of whether that production is owned by a local company or a foreign entity. Everything is valued at market prices. GDP at factor cost is gross domestic product at market prices, less net Market prices are the prices as paid by the consumers Market prices also include product taxes and subsides. The term factor cost refers to the prices of products as received by the producers. Thus, factor cost is equal to market prices, minus net indirect taxes. GDP at factor cost measures money value of output produced by the firms within the domestic boundaries of a country in a year. This measure allows policy-makers to estimate how much the country has to spend just to maintain their current  GDP. If the country is not able to replace the capital stock lost through depreciation, then GDP will fall. NDP at factor cost is the income earned by the factors in the form of wages, profits, rent, interest, etc., within the domestic territory of a country. - Net ProductTaxes - Net ProductionTaxes Product  at Market GDP at Factor Cost Product at Market NDP at Factor Cost 5Following the System of National Accounts 2008 (SNA2008) given by the United Nations in partnership with some other agencies, countries are now switching to new aggregates. India shifted to these aggregates a few years back. what is the maximum amount of goods and services the domestic economy has at its disposal. Current transfers from the rest of the world include items such as gifts, aids, etc. Private Income = Factor income from net domestic product accruing to the private sector + National debt interest + Net factor income from abroad + Current transfers from government + Other net transfers from the rest of Product at Market GNP at Factor Cost Product at Market NNP at Factor Cost GVA at Market Prices GVA at basic prices GVA at factor cost GNPMP is the value of all the final goods and services that are produced by the normal residents of India and is measured at the market prices, in a year. GNP refers to all the economic output produced by a nation s normal residents, whether they are located within the national boundary or abroad. Everything is valued at the market prices. GNPMP = GDPMP + NFIA GNP at factor cost measures value of output received by the factors of production belonging to a country in a - Net ProductTaxes - Net ProductionTaxes This is a measure of how much a country can consume in a given period of time. NNP measures output regardless of where that production has taken place (in domestic territory or abroad). NNP at factor cost is the sum of income earned by all factors in the production in the form of wages, profits, rent and interest, etc., belonging to a country during a year. It is the National Product and is not bound by production in the national boundaries. It is the net domestic factor income added with the net factor income from abroad. Net ProductTaxes - Net ProductionTaxes GDP at market prices GVAMP - Net Product Taxes GVA at basic prices - Net Production Taxes National Income Accounting 2.4 NOMINAL AND REAL GDP One implicit assumption in all this discussion is that the prices of goods and services do not change during the period of our study. If prices change, then there may be difficulties in comparing GDPs. If we measure the GDP of a country in two consecutive years and see that the figure for GDP of the latter year is twice that of the previous year, we may conclude that the volume of production of the country has doubled. But it is possible that only prices of all goods and services have doubled between the two years whereas the production has Therefore, in order to compare the GDP figures (and other macroeconomic variables) of different countries or to compare the GDP figures of the same country at different points of time, we cannot rely on GDPs evaluated at current market prices. For comparison we take the help of real GDP. Real GDP is calculated in a way such that the goods and services are evaluated at some constant set of prices (or constant prices). Since these prices remain fixed, if the Real GDP changes we can be sure that it is the volume of production which is undergoing changes. Nominal GDP, on the other hand, is simply the value of GDP at the current prevailing prices. For example, suppose a country only produces bread. In the year 2000 it had produced 100 units of bread, price was Rs 10 per bread. GDP at current price was Rs 1,000. In 2001 the same country produced 110 units of bread at price Rs 15 per bread. Therefore nominal GDP in 2001 was Rs 1,650 (=110   Rs 15). Real GDP in 2001 calculated at the price of the year 2000 (2000 will be called the base year) will be 110   Rs 10 = Rs 1,100. Notice that the ratio of nominal GDP to real GDP gives us an idea of how the prices have moved from the base year (the year whose prices are being used to calculate the real GDP) to the current year. In the calculation of real and nominal GDP of the current year, the volume of production is fixed. Therefore, if these measures differ it is only due to change in the price level between the base year and the current year. The ratio of nominal to real GDP is a well known index of prices. This is called GDP Deflator. Thus if GDP stands for nominal GDP and gdp stands for real GDP then, GDP deflator = GDP Sometimes the deflator is also denoted in percentage terms. In such a case deflator = GDP gdp    100 per cent. In the previous example, the GDP deflator is 1,100  = 1.50 (in percentage terms this is 150 per cent). This implies that the price of bread produced in 2001 was 1.5 times the price in 2000. Which is true because price of bread has indeed gone up from Rs 10 to Rs 15. Like GDP deflator, we can have GNP deflator as well. There is another way to measure change of prices in an economy which is known as the Consumer Price Index (CPI). This is the index of prices of a given basket of commodities which are bought by the representative consumer. CPI is generally expressed in percentage terms. We have two years under consideration   one is the base year, the other is the current year. We calculate the cost of purchase of a given basket of commodities in the base year. We also calculate the cost of purchase of the same basket in the current year. Then we express the latter as a percentage of the former. This gives us the Consumer Price Index of the current year vis- a-vis the base year. For example let us take an economy which produces two goods, rice and cloth. A representative consumer buys 90 kg of rice and 5 pieces of cloth in a year. Suppose in the year 2000 the price of a kg of rice was Rs 10 and a piece of cloth was Rs 100. So the consumer had to spend a total sum of Rs 10   90 = Rs 900 on rice in 2000. Similarly, she spent Rs 100   5 = Rs 500 per year on cloth. Summation of the two items is, Rs 900 + Rs 500 = Rs 1,400. Now suppose the prices of a kg of rice and a piece of cloth has gone up to Rs 15 and Rs 120 in the year 2005. To buy the same quantity of rice and clothes the representative will have to spend Rs 1,350 and Rs 600 respectively (calculated in a similar way as before). Their sum will be, Rs 1,350 + Rs 600 = Rs 1,950. The CPI therefore will be 1,950 1,400    100 = 139.29 (approximately). It is worth noting that many commodities have two sets of prices. One is the retail price which the consumer actually pays. The other is the wholesale price, the price at which goods are traded in bulk. These two may differ in value because of the margin kept by traders. Goods which are traded in bulk (such as raw materials or semi-finished goods) are not purchased by ordinary consumers. Like CPI, the index for wholesale prices is called Wholesale Price Index (WPI). In countries like USA it is referred to as Producer Price Index (PPI). Notice CPI (and analogously WPI) may differ from GDP deflator because 1. The goods purchased by consumers do not represent all the goods which are produced in a country. GDP deflator takes into account all such goods 2. CPI includes prices of goods consumed by the representative consumer, hence it includes prices of imported goods. GDP deflator does not include prices of 3. The weights are constant in CPI   but they differ according to production level of each good in GDP deflator. 2.5 GDP AND WELFARE Can the GDP of a country be taken as an index of the welfare of the people of that country? If a person has more income he or she can buy more goods and services and his or her material well-being improves. So it may seem reasonable to treat his or her income level as his or her level of well-being. GDP is the sum total of value of goods and services created within the geographical boundary of a country in a particular year. It gets distributed among the people as incomes (except for retained earnings). So we may be tempted to treat higher level of GDP of a country as an index of greater well-being of the people of that country (to account for price changes, we may take the value of real GDP instead of nominal GDP). But there are at least three reasons why this may not be correct. 1. Distribution of GDP   how uniform is it: If the GDP of the country is rising, be concentrated in the hands of very few individuals or firms. For the rest, the income may in fact have fallen. In such a case the welfare of the entire country cannot be said to have increased. For example, suppose in year 2000, an of the country was Rs 1,000 (by income method). In 2001, let us suppose the earning Rs 20 each. Suppose there had been no change in the prices of goods was 90   (Rs 9) + 10   (Rs 20) = Rs 810 + Rs 200 = Rs 1,010. Observe that National Income Accounting compared to 2000, the GDP of the country in 2001 was higher by Rs10. But their real income by 10 per cent (from Rs 10 to Rs 9), whereas only 10 per cent are better off, then surely GDP is not a good index. 2. Non-monetary exchanges: Many activities in an economy are not evaluated in monetary terms. For example, the domestic services women perform at home are not paid for. The exchanges which take place in the informal sector without the help of money are called barter exchanges. In barter exchanges, goods (or services) are directly exchanged against each other. But since money is not being used here, these exchanges are not registered as part of economic activity. In developing countries, where many remote regions are underdeveloped, these kinds of exchanges do take place, but they are generally not counted in the GDPs of these countries. This is a case of underestimation of GDP. Hence, GDP calculated in the standard manner may not give us a clear indication of the productive activity and well-being of a country. 3. Externalities: Externalities refer to the benefits (or harms) a firm or an individual causes to another for which they are not paid (or penalised). Externalities do not have any market in which they can be bought and sold. For example, let us suppose there is an oil refinery which refines crude petroleum and sells it in the market. The output of the refinery is the amount of oil it refines. We can estimate the value added of the refinery by deducting the value of intermediate goods used by the refinery (crude oil in this case) from the value of its output. The value added of the refinery will be counted as part of the GDP of the economy. But in carrying out the production the refinery may also be polluting the nearby river. This may cause harm to the people who use the water of the river. Hence their well being will fall. Pollution may also kill fish or other organisms of the river on which fish survive. As a result, the fishermen of the river may be losing their livelihood. Such harmful effects that the refinery is inflicting on others, for which it will not bear any cost, are called externalities. In this case, the GDP is not taking into account such negative externalities. Therefore, if we take GDP as a measure of welfare of the economy we shall be overestimating the actual welfare. This was an example of negative externality. There can be cases of positive externalities as well. In such cases, GDP will underestimate the actual welfare of How uniform is the distribution of GDP? It still seems that a majority of the people are poor and a few benefited. At a very fundamental level, the macroeconomy (it refers to the economy that we study in macroeconomics) can be seen as working in a circular way. The firms employ inputs supplied by households and produce goods and services to be sold to households. Households get the remuneration from the firms for the services rendered by them and buy goods and services produced by the firms. So we can calculate the aggregate value of goods and services produced in the economy by any of the three methods (a) measuring the aggregate value of factor payments (income method) (b) measuring the aggregate value of goods and services produced by the firms (product method) (c) measuring the aggregate value of spending received by the firms (expenditure method). In the product method, to avoid double counting, we need to deduct the value of intermediate goods and take into account only the aggregate value of final goods and services. We derive the formulae for calculating the aggregate income of an economy by each of these methods. We also take note that goods can also be bought for making investments and these add to the productive capacity of the investing firms. There may be different categories of aggregate income depending on whom these are accruing to. We have pointed out the difference between GDP, GNP, NNP at market price, NNP at factor cost, PI and PDI. Since prices of goods and services may vary, we have discussed how to calculate the three important price indices (GDP deflator, CPI, WPI). Finally we have noted that it may be incorrect to treat GDP as an index of the welfare of the country. Circular flow of income Product method of calculating Expenditure method of calculating Income method of calculating Planned change in inventories Unplanned change in inventories Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Net Domestic Product (NDP) Gross National Product (GNP) Net National Product (NNP) (at market price) NNP (at factor cost) or National Income (NI) Net interest payments made Transfer payments to the Personal Income (PI) households from the government Personal tax payments Personal Disposable Income (PDI) National Disposable Income National Income Accounting 1. What are the four factors of production and what are the remunerations to each of these called? 2. Why should the aggregate final expenditure of an economy be equal to the aggregate factor payments? Explain. 3. Distinguish between stock and flow. Between net investment and capital which is a stock and which is a flow? Compare net investment and capital with flow of water into a tank. 4. What is the difference between planned and unplanned inventory accumulation? Write down the relation between change in inventories and value added of a firm. 5. Write down the three identities of calculating the GDP of a country by the three methods. Also briefly explain why each of these should give us the same value of GDP. 6. Define budget deficit and trade deficit. The excess of private investment over saving of a country in a particular year was Rs 2,000 crores. The amount of budget deficit was (   ) Rs 1,500 crores. What was the volume of trade deficit of that country? 7. Suppose the GDP at market price of a country in a particular year was Rs 1,100 crores. Net Factor Income from Abroad was Rs 100 crores. The value of Indirect taxes   Subsidies was Rs 150 crores and National Income was Rs 850 crores. Calculate the aggregate value of depreciation. 8. Net National Product at Factor Cost of a particular country in a year is Rs 1,900 crores. There are no interest payments made by the households to the firms/government, or by the firms/government to the households. The Personal Disposable Income of the households is Rs 1,200 crores. The personal income taxes paid by them is Rs 600 crores and the value of retained earnings of the firms and government is valued at Rs 200 crores. What is the value of transfer payments made by the government and firms to the households? 9. From the following data, calculate Personal Income and Personal Disposable Net Domestic Product at factor cost Net Factor Income from abroad Interest Received by Households Interest Paid by Households 10. In a single day Raju, the barber, collects Rs 500 from haircuts; over this day, his equipment depreciates in value by Rs 50. Of the remaining Rs 450, Raju pays sales tax worth Rs 30, takes home Rs 200 and retains Rs 220 for improvement and buying of new equipment. He further pays Rs 20 as income tax from his income. Based on this information, complete Raju s contribution to the following measures of income (a) Gross Domestic Product (b) NNP Consumer Price Index (CPI) Wholesale Price Index (WPI) able 2.5: GV GVA and GDP for India at constant (2022 23) prices A and GDP for India at constant (2022 23) prices A and GDP for India at constant (2022 23) prices A and GDP for India at constant (2022 23) prices A and GDP for India at constant (2022 23) prices 6These are provisional estimates released by the CSO in 2018. 1. Bhaduri, A., 1990. Macroeconomics: The Dynamics of Commodity Production, pages 1   27, Macmillan India Limited, New Delhi. 2. Branson, W. H., 1992. Macroeconomic Theory and Policy, (third edition), pages 15   34, Harper Collins Publishers India Pvt Ltd., New Delhi. 3. Dornbusch, R and S. Fischer. 1988. Macroeconomics, (fourth edition) pages 29  62, McGraw Hill, Paris. 4. Mankiw, N. G., 2000. Macroeconomics, (fourth edition) pages 15 76, Macmillan Worth Publishers, New York. at market price (c) NNP at factor cost (d) Personal income (e) Personal 11. The value of the nominal GNP of an economy was Rs 2,500 crores in a particular year. The value of GNP of that country during the same year, evaluated at the prices of same base year, was Rs 3,000 crores. Calculate the value of the GNP deflator of the year in percentage terms. Has the price level risen between the base year and the year under consideration? 12. Write down some of the limitations of using GDP as an index of welfare of a PE (Provisional Estimates) (Amount In ` Crore) GVA at basic prices Net production taxes Source: Annual Report, Reserve Bank of India, 2022 23 (Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy) National Income Accounting (Rs. In Crore) Table 2.6: Components of Gross Domestic Product (2011 12) Table 2.6: Components of Gross Domestic Product (2011 12) Table 2.6: Components of Gross Domestic Product (2011 12) Table 2.6: Components of Gross Domestic Product (2011 12) Table 2.6: Components of Gross Domestic Product (2011 12) Source: Annual Report, Reserve Bank of India, 2022 23 (Handbook of Statistics on Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) Government Final Consumption Expenditure Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) Change in Stocks Exports of Goods and Services Imports of Goods and Services Net Exports (6-7) Net Exports (6-7) Net Exports (6-7) Net Exports (6-7) Net Exports (6-7) Money and Banking Money and Banking Money and Banking Money and Banking Money and Banking Money is the commonly accepted medium of exchange. In an economy which consists of only one individual there cannot be any exchange of commodities and hence there is no role for money. Even if there is more than one individual but these individuals do not take part in market transactions, example: family living on an isolated island, money has no function for them. However, as soon as there is more than one economic agent who engage themselves in transactions through the market, money becomes an important instrument for facilitating these exchanges. Economic exchanges without the mediation of money are referred to as barter exchanges. However, they presume the rather improbable double coincidence of wants. Consider, for example, an individual who has a surplus of rice which she wishes to exchange for clothing. If she is not lucky enough she may not be able to find another person who has the diametrically opposite demand for rice with a surplus of clothing to offer in exchange. The search costs may become prohibitive as the number of individuals increases. Thus, to smoothen the transaction, an intermediate good is necessary which is acceptable to both parties. Such a good is called money. The individuals can then sell their produces for money and use this money to purchase the commodities they need. Though facilitation of exchanges is considered to be the principal role of money, it serves other purposes as well. Following are the main functions of money in a modern economy. 3.1 FUNCTIONS OF MONEY As explained above, the first and foremost role of money is that it acts as a medium of exchange. Barter exchanges become extremely difficult in a large economy because of the high costs people would have to incur looking for suitable persons to exchange their Money also acts as a convenient unit of account. The value of all goods and services can be expressed in monetary units. When we say that the value of a certain wristwatch is Rs 500 we mean that the wristwatch can be exchanged for 500 units of money, where a unit of money is rupee in this case. If the price of a pencil is Rs 2 and that of a pen is Rs 10 we can calculate the relative price of a pen with respect to a pencil, viz. a pen is worth 10    2 = 5 pencils. The same notion can be used to calculate the value of Money and Banking money itself with respect to other commodities. In the above example, a rupee is worth 1    2 = 0.5 pencil or 1    10 = 0.1 pen. Thus if prices of all commodities increase in terms of money i.e., there is a general increase in the price level, the value of money in terms of any commodity must have decreased   in the sense that a unit of money can now purchase less of any commodity. We call it a deterioration in the purchasing power of money. A barter system has other deficiencies. It is difficult to carry forward one s wealth under the barter system. Suppose you have an endowment of rice which you do not wish to consume today entirely. You may regard this stock of surplus rice as an asset which you may wish to consume, or even sell off, for acquiring other commodities at some future date. But rice is a perishable item and cannot be stored beyond a certain period. Also, holding the stock of rice requires a lot of space. You may have to spend considerable time and resources looking for people with a demand for rice when you wish to exchange your stock for buying other commodities. This problem can be solved if you sell your rice for money. Money is not perishable and its storage costs are also considerably lower. It is also acceptable to anyone at any point of time. Thus money can act as a store of value for individuals. Wealth can be stored in the form of money for future use. However, to perform this function well, the value of money must be sufficiently stable. A rising price level may erode the purchasing power of money. It may be noted that any asset other than money can also act as a store of value, e.g. gold, landed property, houses or even bonds (to be introduced shortly). However, they may not be easily convertible to other commodities and do not have universal Some countries have made an attempt to move towards an economy which use less of cash and more of digital transactions. A cashless society describes an economic state whereby financial transactions are not connected with money in the form of physical bank notes or coins but rather through the transfer of digital information (usually an electronic representation of money) between the transacting parties. In India government has been consistently investing in various reforms for greater financial inclusion. During the last few years  initiatives such as Jan Dhan accounts, Aadhar enabled payment systems, e  Wallets, National financial Switch (NFS) and others have strengthened the government resolve to go cashless. Today, financial inclusion is seen as a realistic dream because of mobile and smart phone penetration across the country. 3.2 DEMAND FOR MONEY AND SUPPLY OF MONEY 3.2.1. Demand for Money The demand for money tells us what makes people desire a certain amount of money. Since money is required to conduct transactions, the value of transactions will determine the money people will want to keep: the larger is the quantum of transactions to be made, the larger is the quantity of money demanded. Since the quantum of transactions to be made depends on income, it should be clear that a rise in income will lead to rise in demand for money. Also, when people keep their savings in the form of money rather than putting it in a bank which gives them interest, how much money people keep also depends on rate of interest. Specifically, when interest rates go up, people become less interested in holding money since holding money amounts to holding less of interest-earning deposits, and thus less interest received. Therefore, at higher interest rates, money demanded comes down. 3.2.2. Supply of Money In a modern economy, money comprises cash and bank deposits. Depending on what types of bank deposits are being included, there are many measures of money1. These are created by a system comprising two types of institutions: central bank of the economy and the commercial banking system. Central Bank is a very important institution in a modern economy. Almost every country has one central bank. India got its central bank in 1935. Its name is the  Reserve Bank of India. Central bank has several important functions. It issues the currency of the country. It controls money supply of the country through various methods, like bank rate, open market operations and variations in reserve ratios. It acts as a banker to the government. It is the custodian of the foreign exchange reserves of the economy. It also acts as a bank to the banking system, which is discussed in detail later. From the point of view of money supply, we need to focus on its function of issuing currency. This currency issued by the central bank can be held by the public or by the commercial banks, and is called the  high-powered money  or  reserve money  or  monetary base  as it acts as a basis for credit creation. Commercial banks are the other type of institutions which are a part of the money-creating system of the economy. In the following section we look at the commercial banking system in detail. They accept deposits from the public and lend out part of these funds to those who want to borrow. The interest rate paid by the banks to depositors is lower than the rate charged from the borrowers. This difference between these two types of  interest rates, called the  spread  is the profit appropriated by the bank. The process of deposit and loan (credit) creation by banks is explained below. In order to understand this process, let us discuss a story. Once there was a goldsmith named Lala in a village. In this village, people used gold and other precious metals in order to buy goods and services. In other words, these metals were acting as money. People in the village started keeping their gold with Lala for safe-keeping. In return for keeping their gold, Lala issued paper receipts to people of the village and charged a small fee from them. Slowly, over time, the paper receipts issued by Lala began to circulate as money. This means that instead of giving gold for purchasing wheat, someone would pay for wheat or shoes or any other good by giving the paper receipts issued by Lala. Thus, the paper receipts started acting as money since everyone in the village accepted these as a medium of exchange. Now, let us suppose that Lala had 100 Kgs of gold, deposited by different people and he had issued receipts corresponding to 100 kgs of gold. At this time Ramu comes to Lala and asks for a loan of 25 kgs of gold. Can Lala give the loan? The 100 kgs of gold with him already has claimants. However, Lala could decide that everyone with gold deposits will not come to withdraw their deposits at the same time and so he may as well give the loan to Ramu and charge him for it. If Lala gives the loan of 25 kgs of gold, Ramu could also pay Ali with these 25 kgs of gold and Ali could keep the 25 kgs of gold with Lala in return for a paper receipt. In effect, the paper receipts, acting as money, would 1See the box on the measures of money supply at the end of the chapter. Money and Banking have risen to 125 kgs now. It seems that Lala has created money out of thin air! The modern banking system works precisely the way Lala behaves in this example. Commercial banks mediate between individuals or firms with excess funds and lend to those who need funds. People with excess funds can keep their funds in the form of deposits in banks and those who need funds, borrow funds in form of home loans, crop loans, etc.  People prefer to keep money in banks because banks offer to pay some interest on any deposits made. Also, it may be safer to keep excess funds in a bank, rather than at home, just as people in the example above preferred to keep their gold with Lala instead of keeping at home. In the modern context, given cheques and debit cards, having a demand deposit makes transactions more convenient and safer, even when they do not earn any interest. (Imagine having to pay a large amount in cash   for purchasing a house.) What does the bank do with the funds that have been deposited with it? Assuming that not everyone who has deposited funds with it will ask for their funds back at the same time, the bank can loan these funds to someone who needs the funds at interest (of course, the bank has to be sure it will get the funds back at the required time). So the bank will typically retain a portion of the funds to repay depositors whenever they demand their funds back, and loan the rest. Since banks earn interest from loans they make, any bank would like to lend the maximum possible. However, being able to repay depositors on demand is crucial to the bank s survival. Depositors would keep their funds in a bank only if they are fully confident of getting them back on demand. A bank must, therefore, balance its lending activities so as to ensure that sufficient funds are available to repay any depositor on demand. 3.3 MONEY CREATION BY BANKING SYSTEM Banks can create money in a manner similar to that as given in Lala s story. Banks can lend simply because they do not expect all the depositors to withdraw what they have deposited at the same time. When the banks lend to any person, a new deposit is opened in that person s name. Thus money supply increases to old deposits plus new deposit (plus currency.) Let us take an example. Assume that there is only one bank in the country. Let us construct a fictional balance sheet for this bank. Balance sheet is a record of assets and liabilities of any firm. Conventionally, the assets of the firm are recorded on the left hand side and liabilities on the right hand side. Accounting rules say that both sides of the balance sheet must be equal or total assets must be equal to the total liabilities.  Assets are things a firm owns or what a firm can claim from others. In case of a bank, apart from buildings, furniture, etc., its assets are loans given to public. When the bank gives out loan of Rs 100 to a person, this is the bank s claim on that person for Rs 100. Another asset that a bank has is reserves. Reserves are deposits which commercial banks keep with the Central bank, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and its cash. These reserves are kept partly as cash and partly in the form of financial instruments (bonds and treasury bills) issued by the RBI. Reserves are similar to deposits we keep with banks. We keep deposits and these deposits are our assets, they can be withdrawn by us. Similarly, commercial banks like State Bank of India (SBI) keep their deposits with RBI and these are called Reserves. Assets = Reserves + Loans Liabilities for any firm are its debts or what it owes to others. For a bank, the main liability is the deposits which people keep with it. Liabilities = Deposits The accounting rule states that both sides of the account must balance. Hence if assets are greater than liabilities, they are recorded on the right hand side as Net Worth = Assets   Liabilities 3.3.1 Balance Sheet of a Fictional Bank Let our fictional bank start with deposits (liabilities) equal to Rs 100. This could be because Ms Fernandes has deposited Rs 100 in the bank.  Let this bank deposit the same amount with RBI as reserves. Table 3.1 represents its balance 3.1 Balance Sheet of a Bank If we assume that there is no currency in circulation, then the total money supply in the economy will be equal to Rs 100. M1= Currency + Deposits = 0 +100 =100 3.3.2 Limits to Credit Creation and Money Multiplier Suppose Mr. Mathew comes to this bank for a loan of Rs 500. Can our bank give this loan? If it gives the loan and Mr Mathew deposits the loan amount in the bank itself, the total bank deposits and therefore, the total money supply will rise. It seems as though the banks can go on creating as much money as they want. But is there a limit to money or credit creation by banks? Yes, and this is determined by the Central bank (RBI). The RBI decides a certain percentage of deposits which every bank must keep as reserves. This is done to ensure that no bank is  over lending. This is a legal requirement and is binding on the banks. This is called the  Required Reserve Ratio  or the  Reserve Ratio  or  Cash Reserve Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) = Percentage of deposits which a bank must keep as cash reserves with the bank. Apart from the CRR, banks are also required to keep some reserves in liquid form in the short term. This ratio is called Statutory Liquidity Ratio or SLR. In our fictional example, suppose CRR = 20 per cent, then with deposits of Rs 100, our bank will need to keep Rs 20 (20 per cent of 100) as cash reserves. Only the remaining amount of deposits, i.e., Rs 80 (100   20 = 80) can be used to give loans. The statutory requirement of the reserve ratio acts as a limit to the amount of credit that banks can create. We can understand this by going back to our fictional example of an economy with one bank. Let us assume that our bank starts with a deposit of Rs 100 made by Leela. The reserve ratio is 20 per cent. Thus our bank has Rs 80 (100   20) Money and Banking to lend and the bank lends out Rs 80 to Jaspal Kaur, which shows up in the bank s deposits in the next round as liabilities, making a total of Rs 180 as deposits. Now our bank is required to keep 20 per cent of 180 i.e. Rs 36 as cash reserves. Recall that our bank had started with Rs 100 as cash. Since it is required to keep only Rs 36 as reserves, it can lend Rs 64 again (100   36 = 64). The bank lends out Rs 64 to Junaid. This in turn shows up in the bank as deposits. The process keeps repeating itself till all the required reserves become Rs 100. The required reserves will be Rs 100 only when the total deposits become Rs 500. This is because for deposits of Rs 500, cash reserves would have to be Rs 100 (20 per cent of 500 = 100). The process is illustrated in Table 3.2. Table 3.2: Money Multiplier Process The first column lists each round. The second column depicts the total deposits with the bank at the beginning of each round. Twenty per cent of these deposits need to be deposited with the RBI as required reserves (column 3). What the bank lends in each round gets added to the deposits with the bank in the next round. Column 4 indicates the Loans made by the banks. Table 3.3: Balance Sheet of the Bank Since the bank is only expected to keep 20 per cent of its deposits as reserves, thus, reserves of Rs 100 (20per cent of 500 = 100) can support the deposits of Rs 500. In other words, our bank can give a loan of Rs 400. Table 3.3 demonstrates its balance sheet. M1 = Currency + Deposits = 0 + 500 = 500 Thus, money supply increases from Rs 100 to Rs 500. Given a CRR of 20 per cent, the bank cannot give a loan beyond Rs 400. Hence, requirement of reserves acts as a limit to money creation. In our example, money multiplier. Thus, reserves of Rs 100 create deposits of Rs (5 X 100)=Rs 500. 3.4 POLICY TOOLS TO CONTROL MONEY SUPPLY Reserve Bank is the only institution which can issue currency. When commercial banks need more funds in order to be able to create more credit, they may go to market for such funds or go to the Central Bank. Central bank provides them funds through various instruments. This role of RBI, that of being ready to lend to banks at all times is another important function of the central bank, and due to this central bank is said to be the lender of last resort. The RBI controls the money supply in the economy in various ways. The tools used by the Central bank to control money supply can be quantitative or qualitative. Quantitative tools, control the extent of money supply by changing the CRR, or bank rate or open market operations. Qualitative tools include persuasion by the Central bank in order to make commercial banks discourage or encourage lending which is done through moral suasion, margin It should be evident by now that if the Central bank changes the reserve ratio, this would lead to changes in lending by the banks which, in turn, would impact the deposits and hence, the money supply. In the previously discussed example, what would the money multiplier be if the RBI increases the reserve ratio to 25 per cent? Notice that in the previous case, Rs 100 in reserves could support deposits of Rs 400. But the banking system would now be able to loan Rs 300 only. It would have to call back some loans to meet the increased reserve requirements. Hence, money supply would fall. Another important tool by which the RBI also influences money supply is Open Market Operations. Open Market Operations refers to buying and selling of bonds issued by the Government in the open market. This purchase and sale is entrusted to the Central bank on behalf of the Government. When RBI buys a Government bond in the open market, it pays for it by giving a cheque. This cheque increases the total amount of reserves in the economy and thus increases the money supply. Selling of a bond by RBI (to private individuals or institutions) leads to reduction in quantity of reserves and hence the money supply. There are two types of open market operations: outright and repo. Outright open market operations are permanent in nature: when the central bank buys these securities (thus injecting money into the system), it is without any promise to sell them later. Similarly, when the central bank sells these securities (thus withdrawing money from the system), it is without any promise to buy them Money and Banking later. As a result, the injection/absorption of the money is of permanent nature. However, there is another type of operation in which when the central bank buys the security, this agreement of purchase also has specification about date and price of resale of this security. This type of agreement is called a repurchase agreement or repo. The interest rate at which the money is lent in this way is called the repo rate. Similarly, instead of outright sale of securities the central bank may sell the securities through an agreement which has a specification about the date and price at which it will be repurchased. This type of agreement is called a reverse repurchase agreement or reverse repo. The rate at which the money is withdrawn in this manner is called the reverse repo rate. The Reserve Bank of India conducts repo and reverse repo operations at various maturities: overnight, 7-day, 14- day, etc. This type of operations have now become the main tool of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank of India. The RBI can influence money supply by changing the rate at which it gives loans to the commercial banks. This rate is called the Bank Rate in India. By increasing the bank rate, loans taken by commercial banks become more expensive; this reduces the reserves held by the commercial bank and hence decreases money supply.  A fall in the bank rate can increase the money supply. Box 3.1: Demand and Supply for Money: A Detailed Discussion Money is the most liquid of all assets in the sense that it is universally acceptable and hence can be exchanged for other commodities very easily. On the other hand, it has an opportunity cost. If, instead of holding on to a certain cash balance, you put the money in a fixed deposits in some bank you can earn interest on that money. While deciding on how much money to hold at a certain point of time one has to consider the trade off between the advantage of liquidity and the disadvantage of the foregone interest. Demand for money balance is thus often referred to as liquidity preference. People desire to hold money balance broadly from two motives. The Transaction Motive The principal motive for holding money is to carry out transactions. If you receive your income weekly and pay your bills on the first day of every week, you need not hold any cash balance throughout the rest of the week; you may as well ask your employer to deduct your expenses directly from your weekly salary and deposit the balance in your bank account. But our expenditure patterns do not normally match our receipts. People earn incomes at discrete points in time and spend it continuously throughout the interval. Suppose you earn Rs 100 on the first day of every month and run down this balance evenly over the rest of the month. Thus your cash balance at the beginning and end of the month are Rs 100 and 0, respectively. Your average cash holding can then be calculated as (Rs 100 + Rs 0)   2 = Rs 50, with which you are making transactions worth Rs 100 per month. Hence your average transaction demand for money is equal to half your monthly income, or, in other words, half the value of your monthly transactions. Consider, next, a two-person economy consisting of two entities   a firm (owned by one person) and a worker. The firm pays the worker a salary of Rs 100 at the beginning of every month. The worker, in turn, spends this income over the month on the output produced by the firm   the only good available in this economy! Thus, at the beginning of each month the worker has a money balance of Rs 100 and the firm a balance of Rs 0. On the last day of the month the picture is reversed   the firm has gathered a balance of Rs 100 through its sales to the worker. The average money holding of the firm as well as the worker is equal to Rs 50 each. Thus the total transaction demand for money in this economy is equal to Rs 100. The total volume of monthly transactions in this economy is Rs 200   the firm has sold its output worth Rs 100 to the worker and the latter has sold her services worth Rs 100 to the firm. The transaction demand for money of the economy is again a fraction of the total volume of transactions in the economy over the unit period of time. In general, therefore, the transaction demand for money in an economy, T, can be written in the following form T = k.T where, T is the total value of (nominal) transactions in the economy over unit period and k is a positive fraction. The two-person economy described above can be looked at from another angle. You may perhaps find it surprising that the economy uses money balance worth only Rs 100 for making transactions worth Rs 200 per month. The answer to this riddle is simple   each rupee is changing hands twice a month. On the first day, it is being transferred from the employer s pocket to that of the worker and sometime during the month, it is passing from the worker s hand to the employer s. The number of times a unit of money changes hands during the unit period is called the velocity of circulation of money. In the above example, it is 2, inverse of half   the ratio of money balance and the value of transactions. Thus, in general, we may rewrite equation (3.1) in the following form T = T, or, v.Md T = T where, v = 1/k is the velocity of circulation. Note that the term on the right hand side of the above equation, T, is a flow variable whereas money demand, T, is a stock concept   it refers to the stock of money people are willing to hold at a particular point of time. The velocity of money, v, however, has a time dimension. It refers to the number of times every unit of stock changes hand during a unit period of time, say, a month or a year. Thus, the left hand side, v.Md T, measures the total value of monetary transactions that has been made with this stock in the unit period of time. This is a flow variable and is, therefore, equal to the right hand side. We are ultimately interested in learning the relationship between the aggregate transaction demand for money of an economy and the (nominal) GDP in a given year. The total value of annual transactions in an economy includes transactions in all intermediate goods and services and is clearly much greater than the nominal GDP. However, normally, there exists a stable, positive relationship between value of transactions and the nominal GDP. An increase in nominal GDP implies an increase in the total value of transactions and hence a greater transaction demand for money from equation (3.1). Thus, in general, equation (3.1) can be modified in the T = kPY Money and Banking where Y is the real GDP and P is the general price level or the GDP deflator. The above equation tells us that transaction demand for money is positively related to the real income of an economy and also to its average The Speculative Motive An individual may hold her wealth in the form of landed property, bullion, bonds, money etc. For simplicity, let us club all forms of assets other than money together into a single category called  bonds. Typically, bonds are papers bearing the promise of a future stream of monetary returns over a certain period of time. These papers are issued by governments or firms for borrowing money from the public and they are tradable in the market. Consider the following two-period bond. A firm wishes to raise a loan of Rs 100 from the public. It issues a bond that assures Rs 10 at the end of the first year and Rs 10 plus the principal of Rs 100 at the end of the second year. Such a bond is said to have a face value of Rs 100, a maturity period of two years and a coupon rate of 10 per cent. Assume that the rate of interest prevailing in your savings bank account is equal to 5 per cent. Naturally you would like to compare the earning from this bond with the interest earning of your savings bank account. The exact question that you would ask is as follows: How much money, if kept in my savings bank account, will generate Rs 10 at the end of one year? Let this amount be X. Therefore X (1 + 5 100 ) = 10 In other words, This amount, Rs X, is called the present value of Rs 10 discounted at the market rate of interest. Similarly, let Y be the amount of money which if kept in the savings bank account will generate Rs 110 at the end of two years. Thus, the present value of the stream of returns from the bond should be equal to PV = X + Y = Calculation reveals that it is Rs 109.29 (approx.). It means that if you put Rs 109.29 in your savings bank account it will fetch the same return as the bond. But the seller of the bond is offering the same at a face value of only Rs 100. Clearly the bond is more attractive than the savings bank account and people will rush to get hold of the bond. Competitive bidding will raise the price of the bond above its face value, till price of the bond is equal to its PV. If price rises above the PV the bond becomes less attractive compared to the savings bank account and people would like to get rid of it. The bond will be in excess supply and there will be downward pressure on the bond-price which will bring it back to the PV. It is clear that under competitive assets market condition the price of a bond must always be equal to its present value in equilibrium. Now consider an increase in the market rate of interest from 5 per cent to 6 per cent. The present value, and hence the price of the same bond, will = 107.33 (approx.) It follows that the price of a bond is inversely related to the market rate of interest. Different people have different expectations regarding the future movements in the market rate of interest based on their private information regarding the economy. If you think that the market rate of interest should eventually settle down to 8 per cent per annum, then you may consider the current rate of 5 per cent too low to be sustainable over time. You expect interest rate to rise and consequently bond prices to fall. If you are a bond holder a decrease in bond price means a loss to you   similar to a loss you would suffer if the value of a property held by you suddenly depreciates in the market. Such a loss occurring from a falling bond price is called a capital loss to the bond holder. Under such circumstances, you will try to sell your bond and hold money instead. Thus speculations regarding future movements in interest rate and bond prices give rise to the speculative demand for money. When the interest rate is very high everyone expects it to fall in future and hence anticipates capital gains from bond-holding. Hence people convert their money into bonds. Thus, speculative demand for money is low. When interest rate comes down, more and more people expect it to rise in the future and anticipate capital loss. Thus they convert their bonds into money giving rise to a high speculative demand for money. Hence speculative demand for money is inversely related to the rate of interest. Assuming a simple form, the speculative demand for money can be written as where r is the market rate of interest and rmax and rmin are the upper and lower limits of r, both positive constants. It is evident from the above equation that as r decreases from rmax to rmin, the value of S increases from 0 to. As mentioned earlier, interest rate can be thought of as an opportunity cost or  price  of holding money balance. If supply of money in the economy increases and people purchase bonds with this extra money, demand for bonds will go up, bond prices will rise and rate of interest will decline. In other words, with an increased supply of money in the economy the price you have to pay for holding money balance, viz. the rate of interest, should r   rmin The Speculative Demand for Money Money and Banking come down. However, if the market rate of interest is already low enough so that everybody expects it to rise in future, causing capital losses, nobody will wish to hold bonds. Everyone in the economy will hold their wealth in money balance and if additional money is injected within the economy it will be used up to satiate people s craving for money balances without increasing the demand for bonds and without further lowering the rate of interest below the floor rmin. Such a situation is called a liquidity trap. The speculative money demand function is infinitely elastic here. In Fig. 3.1 the speculative demand for money is plotted on the horizontal axis and the rate of interest on the vertical axis. When r = rmax, speculative demand for money is zero. The rate of interest is so high that everyone expects it to fall in future and hence is sure about a future capital gain. Thus everyone has converted the speculative money balance into bonds. When r = rmin, the economy is in the liquidity trap. Everyone is sure of a future rise in interest rate and a fall in bond prices. Everyone puts whatever wealth they acquire in the form of money and the speculative demand for money is infinite. Total demand for money in an economy is, therefore, composed of transaction demand and speculative demand. The former is directly proportional to real GDP and price level, whereas the latter is inversely related to the market rate of interest. The aggregate money demand in an economy can be summarised by the following equation Md = M T + M or, Md = kPY + r THE SUPPLY OF MONEY: VARIOUS MEASURES In a modern economy money consists mainly of currency notes and coins issued by the monetary authority of the country. In India currency notes are issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which is the monetary authority in India. However, coins are issued by the Government of India. Apart from currency notes and coins, the balance in savings, or current account deposits, held by the public in commercial banks is also considered money since cheques drawn on these accounts are used to settle transactions. Such deposits are called demand deposits as they are payable by the bank on demand from the account-holder. Other deposits, e.g. fixed deposits, have a fixed period to maturity and are referred to as time Though a hundred-rupee note can be used to obtain commodities worth Rs 100 from a shop, the value of the paper itself is negligible   certainly less than Rs 100. Similarly, the value of the metal in a five-rupee coin is probably not worth Rs 5. Why then do people accept such notes and coins in exchange of goods which are apparently more valuable than these? The value of the currency notes and coins is derived from the guarantee provided by the issuing authority of these items. Every currency note bears on its face a promise from the Governor of RBI that if someone produces the note to RBI, or any other commercial bank, RBI will be responsible for 2See Appendix 3.2 for an estimate of the variations in M1 and M3 over time. giving the person purchasing power equal to the value printed on the note. The same is also true of coins. Currency notes and coins are therefore called fiat money. They do not have intrinsic value like a gold or silver coin. They are also called legal tenders as they cannot be refused by any citizen of the country for settlement of any kind of transaction. Cheques drawn on savings or current accounts, however, can be refused by anyone as a mode of payment. Hence, demand deposits are not legal tenders. Legal Definitions: Narrow and Broad Money Money supply, like money demand, is a stock variable. The total stock of money in circulation among the public at a particular point of time is called money supply. RBI publishes figures for four alternative measures of money supply, viz. M1, M2, M3 and M4. They are defined as follows M1 = CU + DD M2 = M1 + Savings deposits with Post Office savings banks M3 = M1 + Net time deposits of commercial banks M4 = M3 + Total deposits with Post Office savings organisations (excluding National Savings Certificates) where, CU is currency (notes plus coins) held by the public and DD is net demand deposits held by commercial banks. The word  net  implies that only deposits of the public held by the banks are to be included in money supply. The interbank deposits, which a commercial bank holds in other commercial banks, are not to be regarded as part of money supply. M1 and M2 are known as narrow money. M3 and M4 are known as broad money. These measures are in decreasing order of liquidity. M1 is most liquid and easiest for transactions whereas M4 is least liquid of all. M3 is the most commonly used measure of money supply. It is also known as aggregate monetary resources2. Money and Banking Box No. 3.2: Demonetisation Demonetisation was a new initiative taken by the Government of India in November 2016 to tackle the problem of corruption, black money, terrorism and circulation of fake currency in the economy. Old currency notes of Rs 500, and Rs 1000 were no longer legal tender. New  currency notes in the denomination of Rs 500 and Rs 2000 were launched. The public were advised to deposit old currency notes in their bank account till 31 December 2016 without any declaration and upto 31March 2017 with the RBI with Further to avoid a complete breakdown and cash crunch, notes government had allowed exchange of Rs 4000 old currency the by new currency per person and per day. Further till 12 December 2016, old currency notes were acceptable as legal tender at petrol pumps, government hospitals and for payment of government dues, like taxes, power bills, etc. This move received both appreciation and criticism. There were long queues outside banks and ATM booths. The shortage of currency in circulation had an adverse impact on the economic activities. However, things improved with time and normalcy returned. This move has had positive impact also. It improved tax compliance as a large number of people were bought in the tax ambit. The savings of an individual were channelised into the formal financial system. As a result, banks have more resources at their disposal which can be used to provide more loans at lower interest rates. It is a demonstration of State s decision to put a curb on black money, showing that tax evasion will no longer be tolerated. Tax evasion will result in financial penalty and social condemnation. Tax compliance will improve and corruption will decrease. Demonetisation could also help tax administration in another way, by shifting transactions out of the cash economy into the formal payment system. Households and firms have begun to shift from cash to electronic payment Exchange of commodities without the mediation of money is called Barter Exchange. It suffers from lack of double coincidence of wants. Money facilitates exchanges by acting as a commonly acceptable medium of exchange. In a modern economy, people hold money broadly for two motives   transaction motive and speculative motive. Supply of money, on the other hand, consists of currency notes and coins, demand and time deposits held by commercial banks, etc. It is classified as narrow and broad money according to the decreasing order of liquidity. In India, the supply of money is regulated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) which acts as the monetary authority of the country. Various actions of the public, the commercial banks of the country and RBI are responsible for changes in the supply of money in the economy. RBI regulates money supply by controlling the stock of high powered money, the bank rate and reserve requirements of the commercial banks. It also sterilises the money supply in the economy against external shocks. Double coincidence of wants Medium of exchange Unit of account Store of value Rate of interest Currency deposit ratio Reserve deposit ratio High powered money Lender of last resort Open market operation Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) Reverse Repo Rate 1. Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer. 1990. Macroeconomics, (fifth edition) pages 345   427, McGraw Hill, Paris. 2. Sikdar, S., 2006. Principles of Macroeconomics, pages 77   89, Oxford University Press, New Delhi. 1. What is a barter system? What are its drawbacks? 2. What are the main functions of money? How does money overcome the shortcomings of a barter system? 3. What is transaction demand for money? How is it related to the value of transactions over a specified period of time? 4. What are the alternative definitions of money supply in India? 5. What is a  legal tender ? What is  fiat money ? 6. What is High Powered Money? 7. Explain the functions of a commercial bank. 8. What is money multiplier? What determines the value of this multiplier? 9. What are the instruments of monetary policy of RBI? 10. Do you consider a commercial bank  creator of money  in the economy? 11. What role of RBI is known as  lender of last resort ? Money and Banking The Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series We want to find out the sum of an infinite geometric series of the following S = a + a.r + a.r2 + a.r3 +...... + a.rn +..... +  where a and r are real numbers and 0 < r < 1. To compute the sum, multiply the above equation by r to obtain r.S = a.r + a.r2 + a.r3 +...... + a.r n + 1  +..... +    Subtract the second equation from the first to get S   r.S  = a or, (1   r)S = a In the example used for the derivation of the money multiplier, a = 1 and r = 0.4. Hence the value of the infinite series is Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Reserve Bank of India, 2022 23 The difference in values between the two columns is attributable to the time deposits held by commercial banks. Money Supply in India Money Supply in India Money Supply in India Money Supply in India Money Supply in India able 3.4: Changes in M1 and M3 Over T Changes in M1 and M3 Over T Changes in M1 and M3 Over T Changes in M1 and M3 Over T Changes in M1 and M3 Over Time (in cr ime (in cr ime (in cr ime (in cr ime (in cror Changes in the Composition of the Sources of Monetary Base Over Time Changes in the Composition of the Sources of Monetary Base Over Time Changes in the Composition of the Sources of Monetary Base Over Time Changes in the Composition of the Sources of Monetary Base Over Time Changes in the Composition of the Sources of Monetary Base Over Time Components of Money Stock Components of Money Stock Components of Money Stock Components of Money Stock Components of Money Stock Table 3.5: Sources of Change in Monetary Base (in Sources of Change in Monetary Base (in Sources of Change in Monetary Base (in Sources of Change in Monetary Base (in Sources of Change in Monetary Base (in ` Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Reserve Bank of India, 2022 23 with the RBI Determination of Income and Determination of Income and Determination of Income and Determination of Income and Determination of Income and We have so far talked about the national income, price level, rate of interest etc. in an ad hoc manner   without investigating the forces that govern their values. The basic objective of macroeconomics is to develop theoretical tools, called models, capable of describing the processes which determine the values of these variables. Specifically, the models attempt to provide theoretical explanation to questions such as what causes periods of slow growth or recessions in the economy, or increment in the price level, or a rise in unemployment. It is difficult to account for all the variables at the same time. Thus, when we concentrate on the determination of a particular variable, we must hold the values of all other variables constant. This is a stylisation typical of almost any theoretical exercise and is called the assumption of ceteris paribus, which literally means  other things remaining equal. You can think of the procedure as follows   in order to solve for the values of two variables x and y from two equations, we solve for one variable, say x, in terms of y from one equation first, and then substitute this value into the other equation to obtain the complete solution. We apply the same method in the analysis of the In this chapter we deal with the determination of National Income under the assumption of fixed price of final goods and constant rate of interest in the economy. The theoretical model used in this chapter is based on the theory given by John Maynard Keynes. 4.1 AGGREGATE DEMAND AND ITS COMPONENTS In the chapter on National Income Accounting, we have come across terms like consumption, investment, or the total output of final goods and services in an economy (GDP). These terms have dual connotations. In Chapter 2 they were used in the accounting sense   denoting actual values of these items as measured by the activities within the economy in a certain year. We call these actual or accounting values ex post measures of these items. These terms, however, can be used with a different connotation. Consumption may denote not what people have actually consumed in a given year, but what they had planned to consume during the same period. Similarly, investment can mean the amount a producer plans to add to her inventory. It may be different from what she ends up doing. Suppose the producer plans to add Rs 100 worth goods to her stock by the end of the year. Her planned investment is, therefore, Rs 100 in that year. However, due to an unforeseen upsurge of demand for her goods in the market the volume of her sales exceeds what she had planned to sell and, to meet this extra demand, she has to sell goods worth Rs 30 from her stock. Therefore, at the end of the year, her inventory goes up by Rs (100   30) = Rs 70 only. Her planned investment is Rs 100 whereas her actual, or ex post, investment is Rs 70 only. We call the planned values of the variables   consumption, investment or output of final goods   their ex ante measures. In simple words, ex-ante depicts what has been planned, and ex-post depicts what has actually happened. In order to understand the determination of income, we need to know the planned values of different components of aggregate demand. Let us look at these components now. The most important determinant of consumption  demand is household income. A consumption function describes the relation between consumption and income. The simplest consumption function assumes that consumption changes at a constant rate as income changes. Of course, even if income is zero, some consumption still takes place. Since this level of consumption is independent of income, it is called autonomous consumption. We can describe this function as: The above equation is called the consumption function. Here C  is the consumption expenditure by households. This consists of two components autonomous consumption and induced consumption (cY ). Autonomous consumption is denoted by C  and shows the consumption which is independent of income. If consumption takes place even when income is zero, it is because of autonomous consumption. The induced component of consumption, cY shows the dependence of consumption on income. When income rises by Re 1. induced consumption rises by MPC i.e. c  or the marginal propensity to consume. It may be explained as a rate of change of consumption as income changes. Now, let us look at the value that MPC can take. When income changes, change in consumption ( can never exceed the change in income. The maximum value which c  can take is 1. On the other hand consumer may choose not to change consumption even when income has changed. In this case MPC = 0. Generally, MPC lies between 0 and 1 (inclusive of both values). This means that as income increases either Determination of Income the consumers does not increase consumption at all (MPC = 0) or use entire change in income on consumption (MPC = 1) or use part of the change in income for changing consumption (0< MPC<1). Imagine  a country Imagenia which has a consumption function described by C=100+0.8Y. This indicates that even when Imagenia does not have any income, its citizens still consume Rs. 100 worth of goods. Imagenia s autonomous consumption is 100. Its marginal propensity to consume is 0.8. This means that if income goes up by Rs. 100 in Imagenia, consumption will go up by Rs. 80. Let us also look at another dimension of this, savings. Savings is that part of income that is not consumed. In other words, We define the marginal propensity to save (MPS) as the rate of change in savings as income increases. Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): Marginal propensity to consume (MPC): it is the change in consumption per unit change in income. It is denoted by c  and is Marginal propensity to save (MPS): Marginal propensity to save (MPS): Marginal propensity to save (MPS): Marginal propensity to save (MPS): Marginal propensity to save (MPS): it is the change in savings per unit change in income. It is denoted by s  and is equal to  1 c Average propensity to consume (APC): Average propensity to consume (APC): Average propensity to consume (APC): Average propensity to consume (APC): Average propensity to consume (APC): it is the consumption per unit of income i.e., C Average propensity to save (APS): Average propensity to save (APS): Average propensity to save (APS): Average propensity to save (APS): Average propensity to save (APS):  it is the savings per unit of income Investment is defined as addition to the stock of physical capital (such as machines, buildings, roads etc., i.e. anything that adds to the future productive capacity of the economy) and changes in the inventory (or the stock of finished goods) of a producer. Note that  investment goods  (such as machines) are also part of the final goods   they are not intermediate goods like raw materials. Machines produced in an economy in a given year are not  used up  to produce other goods but yield their services over a number of years. Investment decisions by producers, such as whether to buy a new machine, depend, to a large extent, on the market rate of interest. However, for simplicity, we assume here that firms plan to invest the same amount every year. We can write the ex ante investment demand as I = I where I  is a positive constant which represents the autonomous (given or exogenous) investment in the economy in a given year. 4.2 DETERMINATION OF INCOME IN TWO-SECTOR MODEL In an economy without a government, the ex ante aggregate demand for final goods is the sum total of the ex ante consumption expenditure and ex ante investment expenditure on such goods, viz. AD = C + I. Substituting the values of C and I from equations (4.1) and (4.2), aggregate demand for final goods can be AD = C  + I  + c.Y If the final goods market is in equilibrium this can be written as Y = C  + I  + c.Y where Y is the ex ante, or planned, ouput of final goods. This equation can be further simplified by adding up the two autonomous terms, C  and I, making it Y = A  + c.Y where A  = C  + I  is the total autonomous expenditure in the economy. In reality, these two components of autonomous expenditure behave in different ways. C, representing subsistence consumption level of an economy, remains more or less stable over time. However, I  has been observed to undergo periodic fluctuations. A word of caution is in order. The term Y on the left hand side of equation (4.3) represents the ex ante output or the planned supply of final goods. On the other hand, the expression on the right hand side denotes ex ante or planned aggregate demand for final goods in the economy. Ex ante supply is equal to ex ante demand only when the final goods market, and hence the economy, is in equilibrium. Equation (4.3) should not, therefore, be confused with the accounting identity of Chapter 2, which states that the ex post value of total output must always be equal to the sum total of ex post consumption and ex post investment in the economy. If ex ante demand for final goods falls short of the output of final goods that the producers have planned to produce in a given year, equation (4.3) will not hold. Stocks will be piling up in the warehouses which we may consider as unintended accumulation of inventories. It should be noted that inventories or stocks refers to that part of output produced which is not sold and therefore remains with the firm. Change in inventory is called Determination of Income inventory investment. It can be negative as well as positive: if there is a rise in inventory, it is positive inventory investment, while a depletion of inventory is negative inventory investment. The inventory investment can take place due to two reasons: (i) the firm decides to keep some stocks for various reasons (this is called planned inventory investment) (ii) the sales differ from the planned level of sales, in which case the firm has to add to/run down existing inventories (this is called unplanned inventory investment). Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Thus even though planned Y greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned greater than planned C, actual Y Y will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual will be equal to actual C the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories the extra output showing up as unintended accumulation of inventories in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post in the ex post I I on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity on the right hand side of the accounting identity. At this point, we can introduce a government in this economy. The major economic activities of the government that affect the aggregate demand for final goods and services can be summarized by the fiscal variables Tax (T) and Government Expenditure (G), both autonomous to our analysis. Government, through its expenditure G on final goods and services, adds to the aggregate demand like other firms and households. On the other hand, taxes imposed by the government take a part of the income away from the household, whose disposable income, therefore, becomes Yd = Y   T. Households spend only a fraction of this disposable income for consumption purpose. Hence, equation (4.3) has to be modified in the following way to incorporate the government Y = C  + I  + G + c (Y   T ) Note that G   c.T, like C  or I, just adds to the autonomous term A. It does not significantly change the analysis in any qualitative way. We shall, for the sake of simplicity, ignore the government sector for the rest of this chapter. Observe also, that without the government imposing indirect taxes and subsidies, the total value of final goods and services produced in the economy, GDP, becomes identically equal to the National Income. Henceforth, throughout the rest of the chapter, we shall refer to Y as GDP or National Income interchangeably. You would recall that in microeconomic theory when we analyse the equilibrium of demand and supply in a single market, the demand and supply curves simultaneously determine the equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity. In macroeconomic theory we proceed in two steps: at the first stage, we work out a macroeconomic equilibrium taking the price level as fixed. At the second stage, we allow the price level to vary and again, analyse macroeconomic equilibrium. What is the justification for taking the price level as fixed? Two reasons can be put forward: (i) at the first stage, we are assuming an economy with unused resources: machineries, buildings and labours. In such a situation, the law of diminishing returns will not apply; hence additional output can be produced without increasing marginal cost. Accordingly, price level does not vary even if the quantity produced changes (ii) this is just a simplifying assumption which will be changed later. 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed 4.3.1 Macroeconomic Equilibrium with Price Level Fixed (A) Graphical Method As already explained, the consumers demand can be expressed by the equation Where C  is Autonomous expenditure and c is the marginal propensity to How can this relation be shown as a graph? To answer this question we will need to recall the  intercept form of the linear Y = a + bX Here, the variables are X and Y and there is a linear relation between them. a and b are constants. This equation is depicted in figure 4.1. The constant  a  is shown as the  intercept  on the Y axis, i.e, the value of Y when X is zero. The constant  b  is the slope of the line i.e. tangent   = b. Consumption Function   Using the same logic, the consumption function can be shown as follows: where, C  = intercept of the c = slope of consumption function = tan   In a two sector model, there are two sources of final demand, the first is consumption and the second  is investment. The investment function was shown as I = I Graphically, this is shown as a horizontal line at a height equal to I above the horizontal axis. In this model, I is autonomous which means, it is the same no matter whatever is the level of Intercept form of the linear equation. Consumption function with intercept C. Investment function with I as autonomous. Determination of Income Aggregate Demand: Graphical Representation Aggregate Demand: Graphical Representation Aggregate Demand: Graphical Representation Aggregate Demand: Graphical Representation Aggregate Demand: Graphical Representation The Aggregate Demand function shows the total demand (made up of consumption + investment) at each level of income. Graphically it means the aggregate demand function can be obtained by consumption and investment Here, OM = C OJ = I OL = C The aggregate demand function is parallel to the consumption function i.e., they have the same slope c. It may be noted that this function shows ex ante demand. Supply Side of Macroeconomic Equilibrium Supply Side of Macroeconomic Equilibrium Supply Side of Macroeconomic Equilibrium Supply Side of Macroeconomic Equilibrium Supply Side of Macroeconomic Equilibrium In microeconomic theory, we show the supply curve on a diagram with price on the vertical axis and quantity supplied on horizontal axis. In the first stage of macroeconomic theory, we are taking the price level as fixed. Here, aggregate supply or the GDP is assumed to smoothly move up or down since they are unused resources of all types available. Whatever is the level of GDP, that much will be supplied and price level has no role to play. This kind of supply situation is shown by a 450 line. Now, the 450 line has the feature that every point on it has the same horizontal and vertical Suppose, GDP is Rs.1,000 at point A. How much will be supplied? The answer is Rs.1000 worth of goods. How can that point be shown? The answer is that supply corresponding to point A is at point B which is obtained at the intersection of the 450 line and the vertical line at A. Equilibrium is shown graphically by putting ex ante aggregate demand and supply together in a diagram (Fig. 4.6). The point where ex ante aggregate demand is equal to ex ante aggregate supply will be equilibrium. Thus, Aggregate supply curve with 45 Aggregate demand is obtained by vertically adding the consumption and investment 4.3.2 Effect of an Autonomous Change in Aggregate Demand on Income We have seen that the equilibrium level of income depends on aggregate demand. Thus, if aggregate demand changes, the equilibrium level of income changes. This can happen in any one or combination of the following situations: 1. Change in consumption:  this can happen due to (i) change inC  (ii) change in c. 2. Change in investment: we have assumed that investment is autonomous. However, it just means that it does not depend on income. There are a number of variables other than income which can affect investment. One important factor is availability of credit: easy availability of credit encourages investment. Another factor is interest rate: interest rate is the cost of investible funds, and at higher interest rates, firms tend to lower investment.  Let us now concentrate on change in investment with the help of the following example.. In this case, the equilibrium income (obtained by equation Y  to AD ) comes out to  be 2501. Now, let investment rise to 20. It can be seen that the new equilibrium will be 300. This can be seen by looking at the graph. This increase in income is due to rise in investment, which is a component of autonomous expenditure here. When autonomous investment increases, the AD1 line shifts in parallel upwards and assumes the position AD2. The value of aggregate demand at, so that equilibrium point is E and equilibrium level of income is (B) Algebraic Method Ex ante aggregate demand = Ex ante aggregate supply = Y Equilibrium requires that the plans of suppliers  are matched by plans of those who provide final demands in the economy. Thus, in this situation, ex ante aggregate demand = ex ante aggregate Equilibrium of ex ante aggregate demand Ex ante Aggregate Demand and Supply Determination of Income output Y * 1 is Y * 1 F, which is greater than the value of output 0Y * 1 = Y * 1 E1 by an amount E1F. E1F measures the amount of excess demand that emerges in the economy as a result of the increase in autonomous expenditure. Thus, E1 no longer represents the equilibrium. To find the new equilibrium in the final goods market we must look for the point where the new aggregate demand line, AD2, intersects the 45 o line. That occurs at point E2, which is, therefore, the new equilibrium point. The new equilibrium values of output and aggregate demand are Y * Note that in the new equilibrium, output and aggregate demand have increased by an amount E1G = E2G, which is greater than the initial increment in autonomous expenditure, D I = E1F = E2 J. Thus an initial increment in the autonomous expenditure seems to have a multiplier on the equilibrium values of aggregate demand and output. What causes aggregate demand and output to increase by an amount larger than the size of the initial increment in autonomous expenditure? We discuss it in section 4.3.3. 4.3.3 The Multiplier Mechanism The Multiplier Mechanism The Multiplier Mechanism The Multiplier Mechanism The Multiplier Mechanism It was seen in the previous section that with a change in the autonomous expenditure of 10 units, the change in equilibrium income is equal to 50 units (from 250 to 300). We can understand this by looking at the multiplier mechanism, which is explained below: The production of final goods employs factors such as labour, capital, land and entrepreneurship. In the absence of indirect taxes or subsidies, the total value of the final goods output is distributed among different factors of production   wages to labour, interest to capital, rent to land etc. Whatever is left over is appropriated by the entrepreneur and is called profit. Thus the sum total of aggregate factor payments in the economy, National Income, is equal to the aggregate value of the output of final goods, GDP. In the above example the value of the extra output, 10, is distributed among various factors as factor payments and hence the income of the economy goes up by 10. When income increases by 10, consumption expenditure goes up by (0.8)10, since people spend 0.8 (= mpc) fraction of their additional income on consumption. Hence, in the next round, aggregate demand in the economy goes up by (0.8)10 and there again emerges an excess demand equal to (0.8)10. Therefore, in the next production cycle, producers increase their planned output further by (0.8)10 to restore equilibrium. When this extra output is distributed among factors, the income of the economy goes up by (0.8)10 and consumption demand increases further by (0.8)210, once again creating excess demand of the same amount. This process goes on, round after round, with producers increasing their output to clear the excess demand in each round and consumers spending a part of their additional Equilibrium Output and Aggregate Demand in the Fixed Price Model income from this extra production on consumption items   thereby creating further excess demand in the next round. Let us register the changes in the values of aggregate demand and output at each round in Table 4.1. The last column measures the increments in the value of the output of final goods (and hence the income of the economy) in each round. The second and third columns measure the increments in total consumption expenditure in the economy and increments in the value of aggregate demand in a similar way. In order to find out the total increase in output of the final goods, we must add up the infinite geometric series in the last column, i.e., 10 + (0.8)10 + (0.8)2 10 +.........  = 10 {1 + (0.8) + (0.8)2 +....... } = 1   0.8  = 50 Table 4.1: The Multiplier Mechanism in the Final Goods Market 10 (Autonomous Increment) The increment in equilibrium value of total output thus exceeds the initial increment in autonomous expenditure. The ratio of the total increment in equilibrium value of final goods output to the initial increment in autonomous expenditure is called the investment multiplier of the economy. Recalling that 10 and 0.8 represent the values of  I  =  A  and mpc, respectively, the expression for the multiplier can be explained as The investment multiplier is the total increment in final goods output and c that the size of the multiplier depends on the value of c. As c  becomes larger the Determination of Income Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift If all the people of the economy increase the proportion of income they save (i.e. if the mps of the economy increases) the total value of savings in the economy will not increase   it will either decline or remain unchanged. This result is known as the Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift Paradox of Thrift   which states that as people become more thrifty they end up saving less or same as before. This result, though sounds apparently impossible, is actually a simple application of the model we have learnt. Let us continue with the example. Suppose at the initial equilibrium of Y = 250, there is an exogenous or autonomous shift in peoples  expenditure pattern   they suddenly become more thrifty. This may happen due to a new information regarding an imminent war or some other impending disaster, which makes people more circumspect and conservative about their expenditures. Hence the mps of the economy increases, or, alternatively, the mpc decreases from 0.8 to 0.5. At the initial income level of AD* 1 = Y * 1 = 250, this sudden decline in mpc will imply a decrease in aggregate consumption spending and hence in aggregate demand, AD = A  + cY, by an amount equal to (0.8   0.5) 250 = 75. This can be regarded as an autonomous reduction in consumption expenditure, to the extent that the change in mpc is occurring from some exogenous cause and is not a consequence of changes in the variables of the model. But as aggregate demand decreases by 75, it falls short of the output Y * 1 = 250 and there emerges an excess supply equal to 75 in the economy. Stocks are piling up in warehouses and producers decide to cut the value of production by 75 in the next round to restore equilibrium in the market. But that would mean a reduction in factor payments in the next round and hence a reduction in income by 75. As income decreases people reduce consumption proportionately but, this time, according to the new value of mpc which is 0.5. Consumption expenditure, and hence aggregate demand, decreases by (0.5)75, which creates again an excess supply in the market. In the next round, therefore, producers reduce output further by (0.5)75. Income of the people decreases accordingly and consumption expenditure and aggregate demand goes down again by (0.5)2 75. The process goes on. However, as can be inferred from the dwindling values of the successive round effects, the process is convergent. What is the total decrease in the value of output and aggregate demand? Add up the infinite series 75 + (0.5) 75 + (0.5)2 75 +........   and the total reduction in output turns out 1   0.5  = 150 But that means the new equilibrium output of the economy is only Y * 100. People are now saving S * 2 = Y * 2   C * 2 = Y * 2   (C  + c2.Y * 2 ) = 100   (40 + 0.5   100) = 10 in aggregate, whereas under the previous equilibrium they were saving S * 1 = Y * 1   C * 1 = Y * 1   (C  + c1.Y * 1) = 250   (40 + 0.8   250) = 10 at the previous mpc, c1 = 0.8. Total value of savings in the economy has, therefore, remained unchanged. When A  changes the line shifts upwards or downwards in parallel. When c changes, however, the line swings up or down. An increase in mps, or a decline in mpc, reduces the slope of the AD line and it swings downwards. We depict the situation in Fig. 4.8. At the initial values of the parameters, A  = 50 equilibrium value of the output and aggregate demand from equation 1   0.8  = 250 Under the changed value of the parameter c = 0.5, the new equilibrium value of output and aggregate demand is 1   0.5  = 100 The equilibrium output and aggregate demand have declined by 150. As explained above, this, in turn, implies that there is no change in the total value of savings. Paradox of Thrift   Downward Swing of AD Line + c Y + c Y 4.4 SOME MORE CONCEPTS The equilibrium output in the economy also determines the level of employment, given the quantities of other factors of production (think of a production function at aggregate level).  This means that the level of output determined by the equality of Y with AD does not necessarily mean the level of output at which everyone is Full employment level of income is that level of income where all the factors of production are fully employed in the production process. Recall that equilibrium attained at the point of equality of Y and AD by itself does not signify full employment of resources. Equilibrium only means that if left to itself the level of income in the economy will not change even when there is unemployment in the economy. The equilibrium level of output may be more or less than the full employment level of output. If it is less than the full employment of output, it is due to the fact that demand is not enough to employ all factors of production. This situation is called the situation of deficient demand. It leads to decline in prices in the long run. On the other hand, if the equilibrium level of output is more than the full employment level, it is due to the fact that the demand is more than the level of output produced at full employment level. This situation is called the situation of excess demand. It leads to rise in prices in the long run. Determination of Income When, at a particular price level, aggregate demand for final goods equals aggregate supply of final goods, the final goods or product market reaches its equilibrium. Aggregate demand for final goods consists of ex ante consumption, ex ante investment, government spending etc. The rate of increase in ex ante consumption due to a unit increment in income is called marginal propensity to consume. For simplicity we assume a constant final goods price and constant rate of interest over short run to determine the level of aggregate demand for final goods in the economy. We also assume that the aggregate supply is perfectly elastic at this price. Under such circumstances, aggregate output is determined solely by the level of aggregate demand. This is known as effective demand principle. An increase (decrease) in autonomous spending causes aggregate output of final goods to increase (decrease) by a larger amount through the multiplier process. Ex ante consumption Marginal propensity to consume Ex ante investment Unintended changes in inventories Effective demand principle Paradox of thrift Autonomous expenditure multiplier 1. What is marginal propensity to consume? How is it related to marginal propensity to save? 2. What is the difference between ex ante investment and ex post investment? 3. What do you understand by  parametric shift of a line ? How does a line shift when its (i) slope decreases, and (ii) its intercept increases? 4. What is  effective demand ? How will you derive the autonomous expenditure multiplier when price of final goods and the rate of interest are given? 5. Measure the level of ex-ante aggregate demand when autonomous investment and consumption expenditure (A) is Rs 50 crores, and MPS is 0.2 and level of income (Y) is Rs 4000 crores. State whether the economy is in equilibrium or not (cite reasons). 6. Explain  Paradox of Thrift. 1. Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer. 1990. Macroeconomics, (fifth edition) pages 63   105. McGraw Hill, Paris. and the Economy and the Economy and the Economy and the Economy and the Economy We introduced the government in chapter one as denoting the state. We stated that apart from the private sector, there is the government which plays a very important role. An economy in which there is both the private sector and the Government is known as a mixed economy.  There are many ways in which the government influences economic life.  In this chapter, we will limit ourselves to the functions which are carried on through the government budget. This chapter proceeds as follows. In section 5.1 we present the components of the government budget to bring out the sources of government revenue and avenues of government spending. In section 5.2 we discuss the topic of balanced, surplus or deficit budget to account for the difference between expenditures and revenue collection.  It specifically deals with the meaning of different kinds of budget deficits, their implications and the measures to contain them. Box. 5.1 deals with fiscal policy and a simple description of the multiplier. The role the government plays has implications for its deficits which further affect its debt- what the government owes. The chapter concludes with an analysis of the debt issue. 5.1 GOVERNMENT BUDGET   MEANING AND ITS COMPONENTS There is a constitutional requirement in India (Article 112) to present before the Parliament a statement of estimated receipts and expenditures of the government in respect of every financial year which runs from 1 April to 31 March. This  Annual Financial Statement  constitutes the main budget document of the Although the budget document relates to the receipts and expenditure of the government for a particular financial year, the impact of it will be there in subsequent years. There is a need therefore to have two accounts- those that relate to the current financial year only are included in the revenue account (also called revenue budget) and those that concern the assets and liabilities of the government into the capital account (also called capital budget). In order to understand the accounts, it is important to first understand the objectives of the government budget. 5.1.1 Objectives of Government Budget The government plays a very important role in increasing the welfare of the people. In order to do that the government intervenes in the economy in the following ways. Allocation Function of Government Budget Government provides certain goods and services which cannot be provided by the market mechanism i.e. by exchange between individual consumers and producers. Examples of such goods are national defence, roads, government administration etc. which are referred to as public goods. To understand why public goods need to be provided by the government, we must understand the difference between private goods such as clothes, cars, food items etc. and public goods. There are two major differences. One, the benefits of public goods are available to all and are not only restricted to one particular consumer. For example, if a person eats a chocolate or wears a shirt, these will not be available to others. It is said that this person s consumption stands in rival relationship to the consumption of others. However, if we consider a public park or measures to reduce air pollution, the benefits will be available to all. One person s consumption of a good does not reduce the amount available for consumption for others and so several people can enjoy the benefits, that is, the consumption of many people is not Two, in case of private goods anyone who does not pay for the goods can be excluded from enjoying its benefits. If you do not buy a ticket, you will not be allowed to watch a movie at a local cinema hall. However, in case of public goods, there is no feasible way of excluding anyone from enjoying the benefits of the good. That is why public goods are called non-excludable.   Even if some users do not pay, it is difficult and sometimes impossible to collect fees for the public good. These non- paying users are known as  free-riders. Consumers will not voluntarily pay for what they can get for free and for which there is no exclusive title to the property being enjoyed. The link between the producer and consumer which occurs through the payment process is broken and the government must step in to provide for such goods. There is, however, a difference between public provision and public production. Public provision means that they are financed through the budget and can be used without any direct payment. Public goods may be produced by the government or the private sector. When goods are produced directly by the government it is called public production. Redistribution Function of Government Budget From chapter two we know that the total national income of the country goes to either the private sector, that is, firms and households (known as private income) or the government (known as public income). Out of private income, what finally reaches the households is known as personal income and the amount that can be spent is the personal disposable income. The government sector affects the personal disposable income of households by making transfers and collecting taxes. It is through this that the government can change the distribution of income and bring about a distribution that is considered  fair  by society. This is the and the Economy Stabilisation Function of Government Budget The government may need to correct fluctuations in income and employment. The overall level of employment and prices in the economy depends upon the level of aggregate demand which depends on the spending decisions of millions of private economic agents apart from the government. These decisions, in turn, depend on many factors such as income and credit availability. In any period, the level of demand may not be sufficient for full utilisation of labour and other resources of the economy. Since wages and prices do not fall below a level, employment cannot be brought back to the earlier level automatically. The government needs to intervene to raise the aggregate demand. On the other hand, there may be times when demand exceeds available output under conditions of high employment and thus may give rise to inflation. In such situations, restrictive conditions may be needed to reduce demand. The intervention of the government whether to expand demand or reduce it constitutes the stabilisation function. 5.1.2 Classification of Receipts Revenue Receipts: Revenue receipts are those receipts that do not lead to a claim on the government. They are therefore termed non-redeemable. They are divided into tax and non-tax revenues. Tax revenues, an important component of revenue receipts, have for long been divided into direct taxes (personal income tax) and firms (corporation tax), and indirect taxes like excise taxes (duties levied on goods produced within the country), customs duties (taxes imposed on goods imported into and exported out of India) and service tax1. Other direct taxes like wealth tax, gift tax and estate duty (now abolished) have never brought in large amount of revenue and thus have been referred to as  paper taxes. The redistribution objective is sought to be achieved through progressive income taxation, in which higher the income, higher is the tax rate. Firms are taxed on a proportional basis, where the tax rate is a particular proportion of profits. With respect to excise taxes, necessities of life are exempted or taxed at low rates, comforts and semi-luxuries are moderately taxed, and luxuries, tobacco and petroleum products are taxed heavily. Non-tax revenue of the central government mainly consists of interest receipts on account of loans by the central government, dividends and profits on investments made by the government, fees and other receipts for services rendered by the government. Cash grants-in-aid from foreign countries and international organisations are also included. The estimates of revenue receipts take into account the effects of tax proposals made in the Finance Bill2. Capital Receipts:  The government also receives money by way of loans or from the sale of its assets. Loans will have to be returned to the agencies from which they have been borrowed. Thus they create liability. Sale of government assets, like sale of shares in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) which is referred 1The India Tax system witnessed a dramatic change with the introduction of the GST (Goods and Services Tax) which encompasses both goods and services and was be implemented by the Centre, 28 states and 7 Union territories from 1 July, 2017. 2A Finance Bill, presented along with the Annual Financial Statement, provides details on the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of taxes proposed in the Budget. and the Economy to as PSU disinvestment, reduce the total amount of financial assets of the government. All those receipts of the government which create liability or reduce financial assets are termed as capital receipts. When government takes fresh loans it will mean that in future these loans will have to be returned and interest will have to be paid on these loans. Similarly, when government sells an asset, then it means that in future its earnings from that asset, will disappear. Thus, these receipts can be debt creating or non-debt creating. 5.1.3. Classification of Expenditure Revenue Expenditure is expenditure incurred for purposes other than the creation of physical or financial assets of the central government. It relates to those expenses incurred for the normal functioning of the government departments and various services, interest payments on debt incurred by the government, and grants given to state governments and other parties (even though some of the grants may be meant for creation of assets). Budget documents classify total expenditure into plan and non-plan expenditure3. This is shown in item 6 on Table 5.1 within revenue expenditure, a distinction is made between plan and non-plan. According to this classification, plan revenue expenditure relates to central Plans (the Five-Year Plans) and central assistance for State and Union Territory plans. Non-plan expenditure, the more important component of revenue expenditure, covers a vast range of general, economic and social services of the 3A case against this kind of classification has been put forth on the ground that it has led to an increasing tendency to start new schemes/projects neglecting maintenance of existing capacity and service levels. It has also led to the misperception that non-plan expenditure is inherently wasteful, adversely affecting resource allocation to social sectors like education and health where salary comprises an important element. Chart 1: The Components of the Government Budget government. The main items of non-plan expenditure are interest payments, defence services, subsidies, salaries and pensions. Interest payments on market loans, external loans and from various reserve funds constitute the single largest component of non-plan revenue expenditure. security concerns, there exists little scope for drastic reduction. Subsidies are an and health, the government also extends subsidies explicitly on items such as exports, interest on loans, food and fertilisers. The amount of subsidies as a 1 percent in 2018-19, 3.6 percent in 2020-21 and 1.2 percent in 2022-23 (B.E). There are expenditures of the government which result in creation of physical or financial assets or reduction in financial liabilities. This includes expenditure on the acquisition of land, building, machinery, equipment, investment in shares, and loans and advances by the central government to state and union territory governments, PSUs and other parties. Capital expenditure is also categorised as plan and non-plan in the budget documents. Plan capital expenditure, like its revenue counterpart, relates to central plan and central assistance for state and union territory plans. Non-plan capital expenditure covers various general, social and economic services provided by the government. The budget is not merely a statement of receipts and expenditures. Since Independence, with the launching of the Five-Year Plans, it has also become a significant national policy statement. The budget, it has been argued, reflects and shapes, and is, in turn, shaped by the country s economic life. Along with the budget, three policy statements are mandated by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003 (FRBMA)4. The Medium-term Fiscal Policy Statement sets a three- year rolling target for specific fiscal indicators and examines whether revenue expenditure can be financed through revenue receipts on a sustainable basis and how productively capital receipts including market borrowings are being utilised. The Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement sets the priorities of the government in the fiscal area, examining current policies and justifying any deviation in important fiscal measures. The Macroeconomic Framework Statement assesses the prospects of the economy with respect to the GDP growth rate, fiscal balance of the central government and external balance5. 5.2 BALANCED, SURPLUS AND DEFICIT BUDGET The government may spend an amount equal to the revenue it collects. This is known as a balanced budget. If it needs to incur higher expenditure, it will have 4Box 5.2  provides a brief account of this legistation and its implication for Government 5The 2005-06 Indian Budget introduced a statement highlighting the gender sensitivities of the budgetary allocations. Gender budgeting is an exercise to translate the stated gender commitments of the government into budgetary commitments, involving special initiatives for empowering women and examination of the utilisation of resources allocated for women and the impact of public expenditure and policies of the government on women. The 2006- 07 budget enlarged the earlier statement. and the Economy to raise the amount through taxes in order to keep the budget balanced. When tax collection exceeds the required expenditure, the budget is said to be in surplus. However, the most common feature is the situation when expenditure exceeds revenue. This is when the government runs a budget deficit. 5.2.1 Measures of Government Deficit When a government spends more than it collects by way of revenue, it incurs a budget deficit6. There are various measures that capture government deficit and they have their own implications for the economy. Revenue Deficit: The revenue deficit refers to the excess of government s revenue expenditure over revenue receipts Revenue deficit = Revenue expenditure   Revenue receipts Table 5.1: Receipts and Expenditures of the Central Government, 2023 24 (P.A.) (As per cent of GDP) 1. Revenue Receipts (a+b) (a) Tax revenue (net of states  share) (b) Non-tax revenue 2. Revenue Expenditure of which (a) Interest payments (b) Major subsidies 3. Revenue Deficit (2 1) 4. Capital Receipts (a+b+c) of which (a) Recovery of loans (b) Other receipts (mainly PSU1 disinvestment) Borrowings and other liabilities 5. Capital Expenditure 6. Non-debt Receipts 7. Total Expenditure (a) Plan expenditure (b) Non-plan expenditure 8. Fiscal deficit [7-1-4(a)-4(b)] 9. Primary Deficit [8 2(a)] Source: Economic Survey, 2023 24, 1 Public Sector Undertaking Item 3 in Table 5.1 shows that revenue deficit in 2023 24 (P.A.) is 2.6 per cent of GDP. The revenue deficit includes only such transactions that affect the current income and expenditure of the government. When the government incurs a revenue deficit, it implies that the government is dissaving and is using up the savings of the other sectors of the economy to finance a part of its consumption expenditure. This situation means that the government will have to borrow not only to finance its investment but also its consumption requirements. This will lead to a build up of stock of debt and interest liabilities and force the government, 6More formally, it refers to the excess of total expenditure (both revenue and capital) over total receipts (both revenue and capital). From the 1997-98 budget, the practice of showing budget deficit has been discontinued in India. eventually, to cut expenditure. Since a major part of revenue expenditure is committed expenditure, it cannot be reduced. Often the government reduces productive capital expenditure or welfare expenditure. This would mean lower growth and adverse welfare implications. Fiscal Deficit: Fiscal deficit is the difference between the government s total expenditure and its total receipts excluding borrowing Gross fiscal deficit = Total expenditure   (Revenue receipts + Non-debt creating capital receipts) Non-debt creating capital receipts are those receipts which are not borrowings and, therefore, do not give rise to debt. Examples are recovery of loans and the proceeds from the sale of PSUs. From Table 5.1 we can see that non-debt creating capital receipts equals 9.4 per cent of GDP, obtained by subtracting, borrowing and other liabilities from total capital receipts [1+4(a)+4(b)]. The fiscal deficit, therefore turn out to be 5.6 per cent of GDP. The fiscal deficit will have to be financed through borrowing. Thus, it indicates the total borrowing requirements of the government from all sources. From the financing side Gross fiscal deficit = Net borrowing at home + Borrowing from RBI + Borrowing from abroad Net borrowing at home includes that directly borrowed from the public through debt instruments (for example, the various small savings schemes) and indirectly from commercial banks through Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). The gross fiscal deficit is a key variable in judging the financial health of the public sector and the stability of the economy. From the way gross fiscal deficit is measured as given above, it can be seen that revenue deficit is a part of fiscal deficit (Fiscal Deficit = Revenue Deficit + Capital Expenditure - non-debt creating capital receipts). A large share of revenue deficit in fiscal deficit indicated that a large part of borrowing is being used to meet its consumption expenditure needs rather than investment. Primary Deficit: We must note that the borrowing requirement of the government includes interest obligations on accumulated debt. The goal of measuring primary deficit is to focus on present fiscal imbalances. To obtain an estimate of borrowing on account of current expenditures exceeding revenues, we need to calculate what has been called the primary deficit. It is simply the fiscal deficit minus the interest payments Gross primary deficit = Gross fiscal deficit   Net interest liabilities Net interest liabilities consist of interest payments minus interest receipts by the government on net domestic lending. Box 5.1: Fiscal Policy One of Keynes s main ideas in The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money was that government fiscal policy should be used to stabilise the level of output and employment. Through changes in its expenditure and taxes, the government attempts to increase output and  income and seeks to stabilise the ups and downs in the economy. In the process, fiscal policy creates a surplus (when total receipts exceed expenditure) or a deficit budget (when total expenditure and the Economy exceed receipts) rather than a balanced budget (when expenditure equals receipts). In what follows, we study the effects of introducing the government sector in our earlier analysis of the determination of income. The government directly affects the level of equilibrium income in two purchases of goods and services (G) increase aggregate demand and taxes, and transfers affect the relation between income (Y) and disposable income (YD)   the income available for consumption and saving with the households. We take taxes first. We assume that the government imposes taxes that do not depend on income, called lump-sum taxes equal to T. We assume throughout the analysis that government makes a constant amount of TR. The consumption function is now C = C  + cYD = C  + c(Y   T + TR where YD = disposable income. We note that taxes lower disposable income and consumption. For instance, if one earns Rs 1 lakh and has to pay Rs 10,000 in taxes, she has the same disposable income as someone who earns Rs 90,000 but pays no taxes. The definition of aggregate demand augmented to include the government will be AD = C  + c(Y   T + TR ) + I + G Graphically, we find that the lump-sum tax shifts the consumption schedule downward in a parallel way and hence the aggregate demand curve shifts in a similar fashion. The income determination condition in the product market will be Y = AD, which can be written as Y = C  + c (Y   T + TR   ) + I + G Solving for the equilibrium level of income, we get Y * = 1  c (C    cT + c TR + I + G) Changes in Government Expenditure We consider the effects of increasing government purchases (G) keeping taxes constant. When G exceeds T, the government runs a deficit. Because G is a component of aggregate spending, planned aggregate expenditure will increase. The aggregate demand schedule shifts up to AD. At the initial level of output, demand exceeds supply and firms expand production. The new equilibrium is at E. The multiplier mechanism (described in Chapter 4) is in operation. The government spending multiplier is derived Suppose G changes to a new level (G+ G) and as a result Y changes to a new. The new levels of G and Y can also be put into equation (5.4). How does the Fiscal Policy try to achieve its  basic objectives? Subtracting equation (5.4) from equation (5.4a) we get 1   c  G In Fig. 5.1, government expenditure increases from G to G  and causes equilibrium income to increase from Y to Y. Changes in Taxes We find that a cut in taxes increases disposable income (Y   T ) at each level of income. This shifts the aggregate expenditure schedule upwards by a fraction c of the decrease in taxes. This is shown in From equation 5.3, we can calculate the tax multiplier using the same method as for the government The tax multiplier Because a tax cut (increase) will cause an increase (reduction) in consumption and output, the tax multiplier is a negative multiplier. Comparing equation (5.6) and (5.8), we find that the tax multiplier is smaller in absolute value compared to the government spending multiplier. This is because an increase in government spending directly affects total spending whereas taxes enter the multiplier process through their impact on influences household consumption (which is a part of total spending). Thus, with a  T reduction in taxes, consumption, and hence total spending, increases in the first instance by c T. To understand how the two multipliers differ, we consider the following example. Y = AD C + I + G   cT' C + I + G   cT Effect of a Reduction in Taxes Y = AD C + I + G'   cT C + I + G   cT and the Economy Assume that the marginal propensity to consume is 0.8. The government expenditure multiplier will then be 1   c  = 1   0.8  = 1 0.2  = 5. For an increase in government spending by 100, the equilibrium income will The tax multiplier is given by c  =  0.8 1   0.8  =  0.8 0.2  =  4. A tax cut of 100 (  T=  100) will increase equilibrium income by 400. Thus, the equilibrium income increases in this case by less than the amount by which it increased under a G increase. Within the present framework, if we take different values of the marginal propensity to consume and calculate the values of the two multipliers, we find that the tax multiplier is always one less in absolute value than the government expenditure multiplier. This has an interesting implication. If an increase in government spending is matched by an equal increase in taxes, so that the budget remains balanced, output will rise by the amount of the increase in government spending. Adding the two policy multipliers gives The balanced budget multiplier =   1   c  +   c  = 1   c  = 1 A balanced budget multiplier of unity implies that a 100 increase in G financed by 100 increase in taxes increases income by just 100. This can be seen from Example 1 where an increase in G by 100 increases output by 500. A tax increase would reduce income by 400 with the net increase of income equal to 100. The equilibrium income refers to the final income that one arrives at in a period sufficiently long for all the rounds of the multipliers to work themselves out. We find that output increases by exactly the amount of increased G with no induced consumption spending due to increase in taxes. To see why the balanced budget multiplier is 1, we examine the multiplier process. The increase in government spending by a certain amount raises income by that amount directly and then indirectly through the multiplier chain increasing income by  Y =  G + c G + c2 G +... =  G (1 + c + c2 +...) But the tax increase only enters the multiplier process when the cut in disposable income reduces consumption by c times the reduction in taxes. Thus the effect on income of the tax increase is given by  Y =   c T   c2 T +... =    T(c + c2 +...) The difference between the two gives the net effect on income. Since  G =  T, from 5.10 and 5.11, we get  Y =  G, that is, income increases by the amount by which government spending increases and the balanced budget multiplier is unity. This multiplier can also be derived from equation 5.3 as follows Why is the poor man crying? Suggest measures to wipe off his tears.  Y =  G  + c ( Y    T) since investment does not change ( I = 0) Since,   G  =  T, we have = 1   c  = 1 Case of Proportional Taxes: A more realistic assumption would be that the government collects a constant fraction, t, of income in the form of taxes so that T = tY. The consumption function with proportional taxes is given by C = C  + c (Y   tY + TR ) = C  + c (1   t ) Y + c TR We note that proportional taxes not only lower consumption at each level of income but also lower the slope of the consumption function. The mpc out of income falls to c (1   t). The new aggregate demand schedule, AD, has a larger intercept but is flatter as shown in Now we have AD = C  + c(1   t)Y + c TR  + I + G = A  + c(1   t)Y Where A  = autonomous expenditure and equals C  + c TR  + I + G. Income determination condition in the product market is, Y = AD, which can be written Y = A  + c (1   t )Y Solving for the equilibrium level of income Y * = 1   (1   ) A so that the multiplier is given 1   (1   ) Comparing this with the value of the multiplier with lump-sum taxes case, we find that the value has become smaller. When income rose as a result of an increase in government spending in the case of lump-sum taxes, Y = AD AD' = C + c(1   t)Y + I + G AD = C + cY + I + G (proportional taxes make the AD schedule Increase in Government Expenditure (with and the Economy consumption increased by  c times the increase in income. consumption will rise by less, (c   ct = c (1   t)) times the increase For changes in G, the multiplier will now be given by  Y =  G  + c (1   t) Y    (5.19) (1   ) The income increases from Y * to Y  as shown in Fig. 5.4. The decrease in taxes works in effect like an increase in propensity to consume as shown in Fig. 5.5. The AD curve shifts up to AD. At the initial level of income, aggregate demand for goods exceeds output because the tax reduction causes increased consumption. The new higher level of income In Example 5.1, if we take a tax rate of 0.25, we find consumption will now rise by 0.60 (c (1   t) = 0.8   0.75) for every unit increase in income instead of the earlier 0.80. Thus, consumption will increase by less than before. The government expenditure multiplier will be 1   (1   ) 1   0.6  = 1 0.4  = 2.5 which is smaller than that obtained with lump-sum taxes. If government expenditure rises by 100, output will rise by the multiplier times the rise in government expenditure, that is, by 2.5   100 = 250. This is smaller than the increase in output with lump-sum taxes. The proportional income tax, thus, acts as an automatic stabiliser   a shock absorber because it makes disposable income, and thus consumer spending, less sensitive to fluctuations in GDP. When GDP rises, disposable income also rises but by less than the rise in GDP because a part of it is siphoned off as taxes. This helps limit the upward fluctuation in consumption spending. During a recession when GDP falls, disposable income falls less sharply, and consumption does not drop as much as it otherwise would have fallen had the tax liability been fixed. This reduces the fall in aggregate demand and stabilises the economy. We note that these fiscal policy instruments can be varied to offset the effects of undesirable shifts in investment demand. That is, if investment falls from I0 to I1, government spending can be raised from G0 to G1 so that autonomous expenditure (C + I0 + G0 = C + I1 + G1) and equilibrium income remain the same. This deliberate action to stabilise the economy is often referred to as discretionary fiscal policy to distinguish it from the inherent automatic stabilising properties of the fiscal system. As discussed earlier, proportional taxes help to stabilise the economy against upward and downward movements. Welfare transfers also help to stabilise income. AD = Y AD' = C + c(1   t')Y + I + G AD = C + c(1   t)Y + I + G Effects of a Reduction in the Proportional Tax During boom years, when employment is high, tax receipts collected to finance such expenditure increase exerting a stabilising pressure on high consumption spending; conversely, during a slump, these welfare payments help sustain consumption. Further, even the private sector has built-in stabilisers. Corporations maintain their dividends in the face of a change in income in the short run and households try to maintain their previous living standards. All these work as shock absorbers without the need for any decision-maker to take action. That is, they work automatically. The built-in stabilisers, however, reduce only part of the fluctuation in the economy, the rest must be taken care of by deliberate Transfers: We suppose that instead of raising government spending in goods and services, government increases transfer payments, TR spending, A, will increase by c TR, so output will rise by less than the amount by which it increases when government expenditure increases because a part of any increase in transfer payments is saved. Using the method used earlier for deriving the government expenditure multipier and the taxation multiplier the change in equilibrium income for a change in transfers is given by  Y = 1   = 1   We suppose that the marginal propensity to consume is 0.75 and we have lump-sum taxes. The change in equilibrium income when government purchases increase by 20 is given by  Y = G  = 4   20 = 80. An increase in transfers of 20 will raise equilibrium income by  Y = 1   0.75 = 3   20 = 60. Thus, we find that income increases by less than it increased with a rise in government purchases. Budgetary deficits must be financed by either taxation, borrowing or printing money. Governments have mostly relied on borrowing, giving rise to what is called government debt. The concepts of deficits and debt are closely related. Deficits can be thought of as a flow which add to the stock of debt. If the government continues to borrow year after year, it leads to the accumulation of debt and the government has to pay more and more by way of interest. These interest payments themselves contribute to the debt. Perspectives on the Appropriate Amount of Government Debt: There are two interlinked aspects of the issue. One is whether government debt is a burden and two, the issue of financing the debt. The burden of debt must be discussed keeping in mind that what is true of one small trader s debt may not be true for the government s debt, and one must deal with the  whole  differently from the  part. Unlike any one trader, the government can raise resources through taxation and printing money. and the Economy By borrowing, the government transfers the burden of reduced consumption on future generations. This is because it borrows by issuing bonds to the people living at present but may decide to pay off the bonds some twenty years later by raising taxes. These may be levied on the young population that have just entered the work force, whose disposable income will go down and hence consumption. Thus, national savings, it was argued, would fall. Also, government borrowing from the people reduces the savings available to the private sector. To the extent that this reduces capital formation and growth, debt acts as a  burden  on future generations. Traditionally, it has been argued that when a government cuts taxes and runs a budget deficit, consumers respond to their after-tax income by spending more. It is possible that these people are short-sighted and do not understand the implications of budget deficits. They may not realise that at some point in the future, the government will have to raise taxes to pay off the debt and accumulated interest. Even if they comprehend this, they may expect the future taxes to fall not on them but on future generations. A counter argument is that consumers are forward-looking and will base their spending not only on their current income but also on their expected future income. They will understand that borrowing today means higher taxes in the future. Further, the consumer will be concerned about future generations because they are the children and grandchildren of the present generation and the family which is the relevant decision making unit, continues living. They would increase savings now, which will fully offset the increased government dissaving so that national savings do not change. This view is called Ricardian equivalence after one of the greatest nineteenth century economists, David Ricardo, who first argued that in the face of high deficits, people save more. It is called  equivalence  because it argues that taxation and borrowing are equivalent means of financing expenditure. When the government increases spending by borrowing today, which will be repaid by taxes in the future, it will have the same impact on the economy as an increase in government expenditure that is financed by a tax increase today. It has often been argued that  debt does not matter because we owe it to ourselves. This is because although there is a transfer of resources between generations, purchasing power remains within the nation. However, any debt that is owed to foreigners involves a burden since we have to send goods abroad corresponding to the interest payments. Other Perspectives on Deficits and Debt: One of the main criticisms of deficits is that they are inflationary. This is because when government increases spending or cuts taxes, aggregate demand increases. Firms may not be able to produce higher quantities that are being demanded at the ongoing prices. Prices will, therefore, have to rise. However, if there are unutilised resources, output is held back by lack of demand. A high fiscal deficit is accompanied by higher demand and greater output and, therefore, need not be inflationary. It has been argued that there is a decrease in investment due to a reduction in the amount of savings available to the private sector. This is because if the government decides to borrow from private citizens by issuing bonds to finance its deficits, these bonds will compete with corporate bonds and other financial instruments for the available supply of funds. If some private savers decide to buy bonds, the funds remaining to be invested in private hands will be smaller. Thus, some private borrowers will get  crowded out  of the financial markets as the government claims an increasing share of the economy s total savings. However, one must note that the economy s flow of savings is not really fixed unless we assume that income cannot be augmented. If government deficits succeed in their goal of raising production, there will be more income and, therefore, more saving. In this case, both government and industry can borrow Also, if the government invests in infrastructure, future generations may be better off, provided the return on such investments is greater than the rate of interest. The actual debt could be paid off by the growth in output. The debt should not then be considered burdensome. The growth in debt will have to be judged by the growth of the economy as a whole. Deficit Reduction: Government deficit can be reduced by an increase in taxes or reduction in expenditure. In India, the government has been trying to increase tax revenue with greater reliance on direct taxes (indirect taxes are regressive in nature   they impact all income groups equally). There has also been an attempt to raise receipts through the sale of shares in PSUs.  However, the major thrust has been towards reduction in government expenditure. This could be achieved through making government activities more efficient through better planning of programmes and better administration. A recent study7 by the Planning Commission has estimated that to transfer Re1 to the poor, government spends Rs 3.65 in the form of food subsidy, showing that cash transfers would lead to increase in welfare. The other way is to change the scope of the government by withdrawing from some of the areas where it operated before. Cutting back government programmes in vital areas like agriculture, education, health, poverty alleviation, etc. would adversely affect the economy. Governments in many countries run huge deficits forcing them to eventually put in place self-imposed constraints of not increasing expenditure over pre-determined levels (Box 5.2 gives the main features of the FRBMA in India). These will have to be examined keeping in view the above factors. We must note that larger deficits do not always signify a more expansionary fiscal policy. The same fiscal measures can give rise to a large or small deficit, depending on the state of the economy. For example, if an economy experiences a recession and GDP falls, tax revenues fall because firms and households pay lower taxes when they earn less. This means that the deficit increases in a recession and falls in a boom, even with no change in fiscal policy. 7 Performance Evaluation of the Targeted Public Distribution System  by the Programme Evaluation Organisation, Planning Commission. and the Economy Discretionary fiscal policy 1. Public goods, as distinct from private goods, are collectively consumed. Two important features of public goods are   they are non-rivalrous in that one person can increase her satisfaction from the good without reducing that obtained by others and they are non-excludable, and there is no feasible way of excluding anyone from enjoying the benefits of the good. These make it difficult to collect fees for their use and private enterprise will in general not provide these goods. Hence, they must be provided by 2. The three functions of allocation, redistribution and stabilisation operate through the expenditure and receipts of the government. 3. The budget, which gives a statement of the receipts and expenditure of the government, is  divided into the revenue budget and capital budget to distinguish between current financial needs and investment in the country s 4. The growth of revenue deficit as a percentage of fiscal deficit points to a deterioration in the quality of government expenditure involving lower capital 5. Proportional taxes reduce the autonomous expenditure multiplier because taxes reduce the marginal propensity to consume out of income. 6. Public debt is burdensome if it reduces future growth in output. 8This has been rescheduled by one year to 2009-10, primarily on account of a shift in plan priorities in favour of revenue expenditure - intensive programmes and schemes. Box 5.2: Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003 (FRBMA) In a multi-party parliamentary system, electoral concerns play an important role in determining expenditure policies. A legislative provision, it is argued, that is applicable to all governments   present and future   is likely to be effective in keeping deficits under control. The enactment of the FRBMA, in August 2003, marked a turning point in fiscal reforms, binding the government through an institutional framework to pursue a prudent fiscal policy. The central government must ensure inter- generational equity and long-term macro-economic stability by achieving sufficient revenue surplus, removing fiscal obstacles to monetary policy and effective debt management by limiting deficits and borrowing. The rules under the Act were notified with effect from July, 2004. 1. The Act mandates the central government to take appropriate measures to reduce fiscal deficit to not more than 3 percent of GDP and to eliminate the revenue deficit by March 31, 20098 and thereafter build up adequate 2. It requires the reduction in fiscal deficit by 0.3 per cent of GDP each year and the revenue deficit by 0.5 per cent. If this is not achieved through tax revenues, the necessary adjustment has to come from a reduction in expenditure. 3. The actual deficits may exceed the targets specified only on grounds of national security or natural calamity or such other exceptional grounds as the central government may specify. 4. The central government shall not borrow from the Reserve Bank of India except by way of advances to meet temporary excess of cash disbursements over cash receipts. 5. The Reserve Bank of India must not subscribe to the primary issues of central government securities from the year 2006-07. 6. Measures to be taken to ensure greater transparency in fiscal operations. 7. The central government to lay before both Houses of Parliament three Medium-term Fiscal Policy Statement, The Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement, The Macroeconomic Framework Statement along with the Annual Financial Statement. 8. Quarterly review of the trends in receipts and expenditure in relation to the budget be placed before both Houses of Parliament. The act applies to the central government. However, 26 states have already enacted fiscal responsibility legislations which have made the rule based fiscal reform programme of the government more broad based. Although the government has emphasised that the FRBMA is an important instituional mechanism to ensure fiscal prudence and support macro economic balance there have been fears that welfare expenditure may get reduced to meet the targets mandated by the Act. FRBM Review Committee In the last thirteen years since the FRBM act was enacted, the Indian economy has graduated to a middle income country. At the time of enactment of the FRBM, there was a general thinking that fiscal rules were better than discretion. However, since then the advanced countries have moved away from this but in India, the government has affirmed its faith in the fiscal policy principles set out in the FRBM. Therefore, there is support for retaining the basic operational framework designed in 2003 but to revamp it to incorporate the changing scenario in India and also with an eye for the future path of growth   the task that has been handed to the FRBM Review Committee. Box 5.3: GST: One Nation, One Tax, One Market Goods and Service Tax (GST) is the single comprehensive indirect tax, operational from 1 July 2017, on supply of goods and services, right from the manufacturer/ service provider to the consumer. It is a destination based consumption tax with facility of Input Tax Credit in the supply chain. It is applicable throughout the country with one rate for one type of goods/service. It has amalgamated a large number of Central and State taxes and cesses. It has replaced large number of taxes on goods and services levied on production/ sale of goods or provision of service. As there have been a number of intermediate goods/services, which were manufactured/provided in the economy, the pre GST tax regime imposed taxes not on the value added at each stage but on the total value of the commodity/service with minimal facility of utilisation of Input Tax and the Economy Credit (ITC). The total value included taxes paid on intermediate goods/services. This amounted to cascading of tax. Under GST, the tax is discharged at every stage of supply and the credit of tax paid at the previous stage is available for set off at the next stage of supply of goods and/or services. It is thus effectively a tax on value addition at each stage of supply. In view of our large and fast growing economy, it addresses to establish parity in taxation across the country, and extend principles of  value- added taxation  to all goods and It has replaced various types of taxes/cesses, levied by the Central and State/UT Governments. Some of the major taxes that were levied by Centre were Central Excise Duty, Service Tax, Central Sales Tax, Cesses like KKC and SBC. The major State taxes were VAT/Sales Tax, Entry Tax, Luxury Tax, Octroi, Entertainment Tax, Taxes on Advertisements, Taxes on Lottery /Betting/ Gambling, State Cesses on goods etc. These have been subsumed in GST. Five petroleum products have been kept out of GST for the time being but with passage of time, they will get subsumed in GST. State Governments will continue to levy VAT on alcoholic liquor for human consumption. Tobacco and tobacco products will attract both GST and Central Excise Duty. Under GST, there are 6 (six) standard rates applied i.e. 0%, 3%,5%, 12%,18% and 28% on supply of all goods and/or services across the GST is the biggest tax reform in the country since independence and was rolled out on the mid-night of 30 June/1 July, 2017 during a special midnight session of the Parliament. The 101th Constitution Amendment Act received assent of the President of India on 8 September, 2016. The amendment introduced Article 246A in the Constitution cross empowering Parliament and Legislatures of States to make laws with reference to Goods and Service Tax imposed by the Union and the States. Thereafter CGST Act, UTGST Act and SGST Acts were enacted for GST. GST has simplified the multiplicity of taxes on goods and services. The laws, procedures and rates of taxes across the country are standardised. It has facilitated the freedom of movement of goods and services and created a common market in the country. It is aimed at reducing the cost of business operations and cascading effect of various taxes on consumers. It has also reduced the overall cost of production, which will make Indian products/services more competitive in the domestic and international markets.  It will also result into higher economic growth as GDP is expected to rise by about 2%. Compliance will also be easier as all tax payment related services like registration, returns, payments are available online through a common portal www.gst.gov.in. It has expanded the tax base, introduced higher transparency in the taxation system, reduced human interface between Taxpayer and Government and is furthering ease of 1. Explain why public goods must be provided by the government. 2. Distinguish between revenue expenditure and capital expenditure. 3.  The fiscal deficit gives the borrowing requirement of the government. 4. Give the relationship between the revenue deficit and the fiscal deficit. 5. Suppose that for a particular economy, investment is equal to 200, government purchases are 150, net taxes (that is lump-sum taxes minus transfers) is 100 and consumption is given by C = 100 + 0.75Y (a) What 1. Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer. 1994. Macroeconomics, sixth edition. 2. Mankiw, N.G., 2000. Macroeconomics, fourth edition. Macmillan Worth publishers, New York. 3. Economic Survey, Government of India, various issues. is the level of equilibrium income? (b) Calculate the value of the government expenditure multiplier and the tax multiplier. (c) If government expenditure increases by 200, find the change in equilibrium income. 6. Consider an economy described by the following functions: C = 20 + 0.80Y, I = 30, G = 50, TR = 100 (a) Find the equilibrium level of income and the autonomous expenditure multiplier in the model. (b) If government expenditure increases by 30, what is the impact on equilibrium income? (c) If a lump-sum tax of 30 is added to pay for the increase in government purchases, how will equilibrium income change? 7. In the above question, calculate the effect on output of a 10 per cent increase in transfers, and a 10 per cent increase in lump-sum taxes. Compare the effects of the two. 8. We suppose that C = 70 + 0.70Y D, I = 90, G = 100, T = 0.10Y (a) Find the equilibrium income. (b) What are tax revenues at equilibrium income? Does the government have a balanced budget? 9. Suppose marginal propensity to consume is 0.75 and there is a 20 per cent proportional income tax. Find the change in equilibrium income for the following (a) Government purchases increase by 20 (b) Transfers decrease by 20. 10. Explain why the tax multiplier is smaller in absolute value than the government expenditure multiplier. 11. Explain the relation between government deficit and government debt. 12. Does public debt impose a burden? Explain. 13. Are fiscal deficits inflationary? 14. Discuss the issue of deficit reduction. 15. What do you understand by G.S.T? How good is the system of G.S.T as compared to the old tax system? State its categories. An open economy is one which interacts with other countries through various channels. So far we had not considered this aspect and just limited to a closed economy in which there are no linkages with the rest of the world in order to simplify our analysis and explain the basic macroeconomic mechanisms. In reality, most modern economies are open. There are three ways in which these linkages are 1. Output Market: An economy can trade in goods and services with other countries. This widens choice in the sense that consumers and producers can choose between domestic and foreign goods. 2. Financial Market: Most often an economy can buy financial assets from other countries. This gives investors the opportunity to choose between domestic and foreign assets. 3. Labour Market: Firms can choose where to locate production and workers to choose where to work. There are various immigration laws which restrict the movement of labour between countries. Movement of goods has traditionally been seen as a substitute for the movement of labour. We focus on the first two linkages. Thus, an open economy is said to be one that trades with other nations in goods and services and most often, also in financial assets. Indians for instance, can consume products which are produced around the world and some of the products from India are exported to other Foreign trade, therefore, influences Indian aggregate demand in two ways. First, when Indians buy foreign goods, this spending escapes as a leakage from the circular flow of income decreasing aggregate demand. Second, our exports to foreigners enter as an injection into the circular flow, increasing aggregate demand for goods produced within the When goods move across national borders, money must be used for the transactions. At the international level there is no single currency that is issued by a single bank. Foreign economic agents will accept a national currency only if they are convinced that the amount of goods they can buy with a certain amount of that currency will not change frequently. In other words, the currency will maintain a stable purchasing power. Without this confidence, a currency will not be used as an international medium of exchange and unit of account since there is no international authority with the power to force the use of a particular currency in international transactions. In the past, governments have tried to gain confidence of potential users by announcing that the national currency will be freely convertible at a fixed price into another asset. Also, the issuing authority will have no control over the value of that asset into which the currency can be converted. This other asset most often has been gold, or other national currencies. There are two aspects of this commitment that has affected its credibility   the ability to convert freely in unlimited amounts and the price at which this conversion takes place. The international monetary system has been set up to handle these issues and ensure stability in international With the increase in the volume of transactions, gold ceased to be the asset into which national currencies could be converted (See Box 6.2). Although some national currencies have international acceptability, what is important in transactions between two countries is the currency in which the trade occurs. For instance, if an Indian wants to buy a good made in America, she would need dollars to complete the transaction. If the price of the good is ten dollars, she would need to know how much it would cost her in Indian rupees. That is, she will need to know the price of dollar in terms of rupees. The price of one currency in terms of another currency is known as the foreign exchange rate or simply the exchange rate. We will discuss this in detail in section 6.2. 6.1 THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS The balance of payments (BoP) record the transactions in goods, services and assets between residents of a country with the rest of the world for a specified time period typically a year. There are two main accounts in the BoP   the current account and the capital account1. 6.1.1 Current Account Current Account is the record of trade in goods and services and transfer payments. Figure 6.1 illustrates the components of Current Account. Trade in goods includes exports and imports of goods. Trade in services includes factor income and non-factor income transactions. Transfer payments are the receipts which the residents of a country get for  free, without having to provide any goods or services in return. They consist of gifts, remittances and grants. They could be given by the government or by private citizens living abroad. 1 There is a new classification in which the balance of payments have been divided into three accounts   the current account, the financial account and the capital account. This is as per the new accounting standards specified by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6). India has also made the change but the Reserve Bank of India continues to publish data accounting to the old Buying foreign goods is expenditure from our country and it becomes the income of that foreign country. Hence, the purchase of foreign goods or imports decreases the domestic demand for goods and services in our country. Similarly, selling of foreign goods or exports brings income to our country and adds to the aggregate domestic demand for goods and services in our country. Fig. 6.1: Components of Current Account Balance on Current Account Current Account is in balance when receipts on current account are equal to the payments on the current account. A surplus current account means that the nation is a lender to other countries and a deficit current account means that the nation is a borrower from other countries. Balance on Current Account has two components:  Balance of Trade or Trade Balance  Balance on Invisibles Balance of Trade (BOT) is the difference between the value of exports and value of imports of goods of a country in a given period of time. Export of goods is entered as a credit item in BOT, whereas import of goods is entered as a debit item in BOT. It is also known as Trade BOT is said to be in balance when exports of goods are equal to the imports of goods. Surplus BOT or Trade surplus will arise if country exports more goods than what it imports. Whereas, Deficit BOT or Trade deficit will arise if a country imports more goods than what it exports. Net Invisibles is the difference between the value of exports and value Receipts > Payments Receipts = Payments         Receipts < Payments of imports of invisibles of a country in a given period of time. Invisibles include services, transfers and flows of income that take place between different countries. Services trade includes both factor and non-factor income. Factor income includes net international earnings on factors of production (like labour, land and capital). Non-factor income is net sale of service products like shipping, banking, tourism, software services, etc. 6.1.2  Capital Account Capital Account records all international transactions of assets. An asset is any one of the forms in which wealth can be held, for example: money, stocks, bonds, Government debt, etc. Purchase of assets is a debit item on the capital account. If an Indian buys a UK Car Company, it enters capital account transactions as a debit item (as foreign exchange is flowing out of India). On the other hand, sale of assets like sale of share of an Indian company to a Chinese customer is a credit item on the capital account. Fig. 6.2 classifies the items which are a part of capital account transactions. These items are Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs), Foreign Institutional Investments (FIIs), external borrowings and assistance. Fig. 6.2: Components of Capital Account Balance on Capital Account Capital account is in balance when capital inflows (like receipt of loans from abroad, sale of assets or shares in foreign companies) are equal to capital outflows (like repayment of loans, purchase of assets or shares in foreign countries). Surplus in capital account arises when capital inflows are greater than capital outflows, whereas deficit in capital account arises when capital inflows are lesser than capital outflows. 6.1.3  Balance of Payments Surplus and Deficit The essence of international payments is that just like an individual who spends more than her income must finance the difference by selling assets or by borrowing, a country that has a deficit in its current account (spending more than it receives from sales to the rest of the world) must finance it by selling assets or by borrowing abroad. Thus, any current account deficit must be financed by a capital account surplus, that is, a net capital inflow. Current account + Capital account In this case, in which a country is said to be in balance of payments equilibrium, the current account deficit is financed entirely by international lending without any reserve movements. Alternatively, the country could use its reserves of foreign exchange in order to balance any deficit in its balance of payments. The reserve bank sells foreign exchange when there is a deficit. This is called official reserve sale. The decrease (increase) in official reserves is called the overall balance of payments deficit (surplus). The basic premise is that the monetary authorities are the ultimate financiers of any deficit in the balance of payments (or the recipients of any surplus). We note that official reserve transactions are more relevant under a regime of fixed exchange rates than when exchange rates are floating. (See sub heading  Fixed Exchange Rates  under section 6.2.2) Autonomous and Accommodating Transactions International economic transactions are called autonomous when transactions are made due to some reason other than to bridge the gap in the balance of payments, that is, when they are independent of the state of BoP. One reason could be to earn profit. These items are called  above the line  items in the BoP. The balance of payments is said to be in surplus (deficit) if autonomous receipts are greater (less) than Accommodating transactions (termed  below the line  items), on the other hand, are determined by the gap in the balance of payments, that is, whether there is a deficit or surplus in the balance of payments. In other words, they are determined by the net consequences of the autonomous transactions. Since the official reserve transactions are made to bridge the gap in the BoP, they are seen as the accommodating item in the BoP (all others being autonomous). Errors and Omissions It is difficult to record all international transactions accurately. Thus, we have a third element of BoP (apart from the current and capital accounts) called errors and omissions which reflects this. Table 6.1 provides a sample of Balance of Payments for India. Note in this table, there is a trade deficit and current account deficit but a capital account surplus. As a result, BOP is in balance. Overall Balance < 0 Overall Balance = 0 Overall Balance > 0 Reserve Change > 0 Reserve Change = 0 Reserve Change < 0 Box 6.1:  The balance of payments accounts presented above divide the transactions into two accounts, current account and capital account. However, following  the new accounting standards introduced by the International Monetary Fund in the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6) the Reserve Bank of India also made changes in the structure of balance of payments accounts. According to the new classification, the transactions are divided into three accounts: current account, financial account and capital account. The most important change is that almost all the transactions arising on account of trade in financial assets such as bonds and equity shares are now placed in the financial account. However, RBI continues to publish the balance of payments accounts as per the old system also, therefore the details of the new system are not being given here. The details are given in the Balance of Payments Manual for India published by the Reserve Bank of India in Table 6.1: Balance of Payments for India (in million USD) Exports (of goods only) Imports (of goods only) Trade Balance [2   1] (Net) Invisibles [4a + 4b + 4c] a. Non-factor Services Current Account Balance [ 3+ 4] Capital Account Balance [6a + 6b + 6c + 6d + 6e + 6f] a. External Assistance (net) b. External Commercial Borrowings (net) c. Short-term Debt d. Banking Capital (net) of which Non-resident Deposits (net) e. Foreign Investments (net) of which [6eA + 6eB] A. FDI (net) 6.2 THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET So far, we have considered the accounting of international transactions on the whole, we will now take up a single transaction. Let us assume that a single Indian resident wants to visit London on a vacation (an import of tourist services). She will have to pay in pounds for her stay there. She will need to know where to obtain the pounds and at what price. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, this price is known as the exchange rate. The market in which national currencies are traded for one another is known as the foreign exchange market. The major participants in the foreign exchange market are commercial banks, foreign exchange brokers and other authorised dealers and monetary authorities. It is important to note that although participants themselves may have their own trading centres, the market itself is world-wide. There is a close and continuous contact between the trading centres and the participants deal in more than one market. 6.2.1 Foreign Exchange Rate Foreign Exchange Rate (also called Forex Rate) is the price of one currency in terms of another. It links the currencies of different countries and enables comparison of international costs and prices. For example, if we have to pay Rs 50 for $1 then the exchange rate is Rs 50 per dollar. To make it simple, let us consider that India and USA are the only countries in the world and so there is only one exchange rate that needs to be determined. Demand for Foreign Exchange People demand foreign exchange because: they want to purchase goods and services from other countries; they want to send gifts abroad; and, they want to purchase financial assets of a certain country. A rise in price of foreign exchange will increase the cost (in terms of rupees) of purchasing a foreign good. This reduces demand for imports and hence demand for foreign exchange also decreases, other things Supply of Foreign Exchange Foreign currency flows into the home country due to the following reasons: exports by a country lead to the purchase of its domestic goods and services by the foreigners; foreigners send gifts or make transfers; and, the assets of a home country are bought by the foreigners. A rise in price of foreign exchange will reduce the foreigner s cost (in terms of USD) while purchasing products from India, other things remaining constant. This increases India s exports and hence supply for foreign exchange may B. Portfolio (net) f. Other Flows (net) Errors and Omissions Overall Balance [5 + 6 + 7] increase (whether it actually increases depends on a number of factors, particularly elasticity of demand for exports and imports. 6.2.2 Determination of the Exchange Rate Different countries have different methods of determining their currency s exchange rate. It can be determined through Flexible Exchange Rate, Fixed Exchange Rate or Managed Floating Exchange Rate. Flexible Exchange Rate This exchange rate is determined by the market forces of demand and supply. It is also known as Floating Exchange Rate. As depicted in Fig.  6.1, the exchange rate is determined where the demand curve intersects with the supply curve, i.e., at point e on the Y   axis. Point q on the x   axis determines the quantity of US Dollars that have been demanded and supplied on e exchange rate. In a completely flexible system, the Central banks do not intervene in the foreign exchange Suppose the demand for foreign goods and services increases (for example, due to travelling by Indians), then as depicted in Fig. 6.2, the demand curve shifts upward and right to the original demand curve. The increase in demand for foreign goods and services result in a change in the exchange rate. The initial exchange rate e0 = 50, which means that we need to exchange Rs 50 for one dollar. At the new equilibrium, the exchange rate becomes e1 = 70, which means that we need to pay more rupees for a dollar now (i.e., Rs 70). It indicates that the value of rupees in terms of dollars has fallen and value of dollar in terms of rupees has risen. Increase in exchange rate implies that the price of foreign currency (dollar) in terms of domestic currency (rupees) has increased. This is called Depreciation of domestic currency (rupees) in terms of foreign currency (dollars). Similarly, in a flexible exchange rate regime, when the price of domestic currency (rupees) in terms of foreign currency (dollars) increases, it is called Appreciation of the domestic currency (rupees) in terms of foreign currency (dollars). This means that the Equilibrium under Flexible Exchange Rates Effect of an Increase in Demand for Imports in the Foreign Exchange Market value of rupees relative to dollar has risen and we need to pay fewer rupees in exchange for one dollar. Money in any country is an asset. If Indians believe that British pound is going to increase in value relative to the rupee, they will want to hold pounds. Thus exchange rates also get affected when people hold foreign exchange on the expectation that they can make gains from the appreciation of the currency. This expectation in turn can actually affect the exchange rate in the following way. If the current exchange rate is Rs. 80 to a pound and investors believe that the pound is going to appreciate by the end of the month and will be worth Rs.85, investors think if they gave the dealer Rs. 80,000 and bought 1000 pounds, at the end of the month, they would be able to exchange the pounds for Rs. 85,000, thus making a profit of Rs. 5,000. This expectation would increase the demand for pounds and cause the rupee-pound exchange rate to increase in the present, making the beliefs self-fulfilling. Interest Rates and the Exchange Rate In the short run, another factor that is important in determining exchange rate movements is the interest rate differential i.e. the difference between interest rates between countries. There are huge funds owned by banks, multinational corporations and wealthy individuals which move around the world in search of the highest interest rates. If we assume that government bonds in country A pay 8 per cent rate of interest whereas equally safe bonds in county B yield 10 per cent, the interest rate differential is 2 per cent. Investors from country A will be attracted by the high interest rates in country B and will buy the currency of country B selling their own currency. At the same time investors in country B will also find investing in their own country more attractive and will therefore demand less of country A s currency. This means that the demand curve for country A s currency will shift to the left and the supply curve will shift to the right causing a depreciation of country A s currency and an appreciation of country B s currency. Thus, a rise in the interest rates at home often leads to an appreciation of the domestic currency. Here, the implicit assumption is that no restrictions exist in buying bonds issued by foreign governments. Income and the Exchange Rate When income increases, consumer spending increases. Spending on imported goods is also likely to increase. When imports increase, the demand curve for foreign exchange shifts to the right. There is a depreciation of the domestic currency. If there is an increase in income abroad as well, domestic exports will rise and the supply curve of foreign exchange shifts outward. On balance, the domestic currency may or may not depreciate. What happens will depend on whether exports are growing faster than imports. In general, other things remaining equal, a country whose aggregate demand grows faster than the rest of the world s normally finds its currency depreciating because its imports grow faster than its exports. Its demand curve for foreign currency shifts faster than its supply curve. Exchange Rates in the Long Run The purchasing Power (PPP) theory is used to make long-run predictions about exchange rates in a flexible exchange rate system. According to the theory, as long as there are no barriers to trade like tariffs (taxes on trade) and quotas (quantitative limits on imports), exchange rates should eventually adjust so that the same product costs the same whether measured in rupees in India, or dollars in the US, yen in Japan and so on, except for differences in transportation. Over the long run, therefore, exchange rates between any two national currencies adjust to reflect differences in the price levels in the two countries. If a shirt costs $8 in the US and Rs 400 in India, the rupee-dollar exchange rate should be Rs 50. To see why, at any rate higher than Rs 50, say Rs 60, it costs Rs 480 per shirt in the US but only Rs 400 in India. In that case, all foreign customers would buy shirts from India. Similarly, any exchange rate below Rs 50 per dollar will send all the shirt business to the US. Next, we suppose that prices in India rise by 20 per cent while prices in the US rise by 50 per cent. Indian shirts would now cost Rs 480 per shirt while American shirts cost $12 per shirt. For these two prices to be equivalent, $12 must be worth Rs 480, or one dollar must be worth Rs 40. The dollar, therefore, has depreciated. Fixed Exchange Rates In this exchange rate system, the Government fixes the exchange rate at a particular level. In Fig. 6.3, the market determined exchange rate is e. However, let us suppose that for some reason the Indian Government wants to encourage exports for which it needs to make rupee cheaper for foreigners it would do so by fixing a higher exchange rate, say Rs 70 per dollar from the current exchange rate of Rs 50 per dollar. Thus, the new exchange rate set by the Government is e1, where e1 > e. At this exchange rate, the supply of dollars exceeds the demand for dollars. The RBI intervenes to purchase the dollars for rupees in the foreign exchange market in order to absorb this excess supply which has been marked as AB in the figure. Thus, Government can maintain any exchange rate in the economy. But it will be accumulating more and more foreign exchange so long as this intervention goes on. On the other hand if the goverment was to set an exchange rate at a level such as e2, there would be an excess demand for dollars in the foreign exchange market. To meet this excess demand for dollars, the government would have to withdraw dollars from its past holdings of dollars. If it fails to do so, a black market for dollars may come up. In a fixed exchange rate system, when some government action increases the exchange rate (thereby, making domestic currency cheaper) is called Devaluation. On the other hand, a Revaluation is said to occur, when the Government decreases the exchange rate (thereby, making domestic currency costlier) in a fixed exchange Foreign Exchange Market with Fixed Exchange 6.2.3 Merits and Demerits of Flexible and Fixed Exchange Rate Systems The main feature of the fixed exchange rate system is that there must be credibility that the government will be able to maintain the exchange rate at the level specified. Often, if there is a deficit in the BoP, in a fixed exchange rate system, governments will have to intervene to take care of the gap by use of its official reserves. If people know that the amount of reserves is inadequate, they would begin to doubt the ability of the government to maintain the fixed rate. This may give rise to speculation of devaluation. When this belief translates into aggressive buying of one currency thereby forcing the government to devalue, it is said to constitute a speculative attack on a currency. Fixed exchange rates are prone to these kinds of attacks, as has been witnessed in the period before the collapse of the Bretton Woods System. The flexible exchange rate system gives the government more flexibility and they do not need to maintain large stocks of foreign exchange reserves. The major advantage of flexible exchange rates is that movements in the exchange rate automatically take care of the surpluses and deficits in the BoP. Also, countries gain independence in conducting their monetary policies, since they do not have to intervene to maintain exchange rate which are automatically taken care of by the market. 6.2.4 Managed Floating Without any formal international agreement, the world has moved on to what can be best described as a managed floating exchange rate system. It is a mixture of a flexible exchange rate system (the float part) and a fixed rate system (the managed part). Under this system, also called dirty floating, central banks intervene to buy and sell foreign currencies in an attempt to moderate exchange rate movements whenever they feel that such actions are appropriate. Official reserve transactions are, therefore, not equal to zero. Balance of payments Current account deficit Official reserve transactions Autonomous and accommodating Nominal and real exchange rate Purchasing power parity Flexible exchange rate Interest rate differential Fixed exchange rate Demand for domestic goods Marginal propensity to import Open economy multiplier 1. Differentiate between balance of trade and current account balance. 2. What are official reserve transactions? Explain their importance in the balance 3. Distinguish between the nominal exchange rate and the real exchange rate. If you were to decide whether to buy domestic goods or foreign goods, which rate would be more relevant? Explain. 4. Suppose it takes 1.25 yen to buy a rupee, and the price level in Japan is 3 and the price level in India is 1.2. Calculate the real exchange rate between India and Japan (the price of Japanese goods in terms of Indian goods). (Hint: First find out the nominal exchange rate as a price of yen in rupees). 5. Explain the automatic mechanism by which BoP equilibrium was achieved under the gold standard. 6. How is the exchange rate determined under a flexible exchange rate regime? 7. Differentiate between devaluation and depreciation. 8. Would the central bank need to intervene in a managed floating system? 9. Are the concepts of demand for domestic goods and domestic demand for goods the same? 10. What is the marginal propensity to import when M = 60 + 0.06Y? What is the relationship between the marginal propensity to import and the aggregate demand function? 11. Why is the open economy autonomous expenditure multiplier smaller than the closed economy one? 12. Calculate the open economy multiplier with proportional taxes, T = tY, instead of lump-sum taxes as assumed in the text. 13. Suppose C = 40 + 0.8Y D, T = 50, I = 60, G = 40, X = 90, M = 50 + 0.05Y (a) Find equilibrium income. (b) Find the net export balance at equilibrium income (c) What happens to equilibrium income and the net export balance when the government purchases increase from 40 and 50? 14. In the above example, if exports change to X = 100, find the change in equilibrium income and the net export balance. 15. Suppose the exchange rate between the Rupee and the dollar was Rs. 30=1$ in the year 2010. Suppose the prices have doubled in India over 20 years while they have remained fixed in USA. What, according to the purchasing power parity theory will be the exchange rate between dollar and rupee in the year 2030. 16. If inflation is higher in country A than in Country B, and the exchange rate between the two countries is fixed, what is likely to happen to the trade balance between the two countries? 17. Should a current account deficit be a cause for alarm? Explain. 18. Suppose C = 100 + 0.75Y D, I = 500, G = 750, taxes are 20 per cent of income, X = 150, M = 100 + 0.2Y. Calculate equilibrium income, the budget deficit or surplus and the trade deficit or surplus. 19. Discuss some of the exchange rate arrangements that countries have entered into to bring about stability in their external accounts. DETERMINATION OF EQUILIBRIUM INCOME IN OPEN ECONOMY With consumers and firms having an option to buy goods produced at home and abroad, we now need to distinguish between domestic demand for goods and the demand for domestic goods. National Income Identity for an Open Economy In a closed economy, there are three sources of demand for domestic goods   Consumption (C ), government spending (G ), and domestic investment (I ). We can write Y = C + I + G In an open economy, exports (X ) constitute an additional source of demand for domestic goods and services that comes from abroad and therefore must be added to aggregate demand. Imports (M ) supplement supplies in domestic markets and constitute that part of domestic demand that falls on foreign goods and services. Therefore, the national income identity for an open economy Y + M = C + I + G + X Rearranging, we get Y = C + I + G + X   M Y = C + I + G + NX where, NX is net exports (exports   imports). A positive NX (with exports greater than imports) implies a trade surplus and a negative NX (with imports exceeding exports) implies a trade deficit. To examine the roles of imports and exports in determining equilibrium income in an open economy, we follow the same procedure as we did for the closed economy case   we take investment and government spending as autonomous. In addition, we need to specify the determinants of imports and exports. The demand for imports depends on domestic income (Y) and the real exchange rate (R ). Higher income leads to higher imports. Recall that the real exchange rate is defined as the relative price of foreign goods in terms of domestic goods. A higher R makes foreign goods relatively more expensive, thereby leading to a decrease in the quantity of imports. Thus, imports depend positively on Y and negatively on R. The export of one country is, by definition, the import of another. Thus, our exports would constitute of foreign imports. It would depend on foreign income, Yf, and on R. A rise in Yf will increase foreign demand for our goods, thus leading to higher exports. An increase in R, which makes domestic goods cheaper, will increase our exports. Exports depend positively on foreign income and the real exchange rate. Thus, exports and imports depend on domestic income, foreign income and the real exchange rate. We assume price 1. Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer, 1994. Macroeconomics, sixth edition, 2. Economic Survey, Government of India, 2006-07. 3. Krugman, P.R. and M. Obstfeld, 2000. International Economics, Theory and Policy, fifth edition, Pearson Education. levels and the nominal exchange rate to be constant, hence R will be fixed. From the point of view of our country, foreign income, and therefore exports, are considered exogenous (X = X ). The demand for imports is thus assumed to depend on income and have an autonomous component M = M  + mY, where M  > 0 is the autonomous component, 0 < m < 1. Here m is the marginal propensity to import, the fraction of an extra rupee of income spent on imports, a concept analogous to the marginal propensity to The equilibrium income would be Y = C  + c(Y   T ) + I  + G  + X    M    mY Taking all the autonomous components together as A, we get Y = A  + cY   mY (1   c + m)Y = A Y * = In order to examine the effects of allowing for foreign trade in the income- expenditure framework, we need to compare equation (6.10) with the equivalent expression for the equilibrium income in a closed economy model. In both equations, equilibrium income is expressed as a product of two terms, the autonomous expenditure multiplier and the level of autonomous expenditures. We consider how each of these change in the open economy context. Since m, the marginal propensity to import, is greater than zero, we get a smaller multiplier in an open economy. It is given by The open economy multiplier = 1   c If c = 0.8 and m = 0.3, we would have the open and closed economy multiplier 1   c  = 1   0.8  = 1 0.2  = 5 1   c 1   0.8 0.3  = 1 0.5  = 2 If domestic autonomous demand increases by 100, in a closed economy output increases by 500 whereas it increases by only 200 in an open economy. The fall in the value of the autonomous expenditure multiplier with the opening up of the economy can be explained with reference to our previous discussion of the multiplier process (Chapter 4). A change in autonomous expenditures, for instance a change in government spending, will have a direct effect on income and an induced effect on consumption with a further effect on income. With an mpc greater than zero, a proportion of the induced effect on consumption will be a demand for foreign, not domestic goods. Therefore, the induced effect on demand for domestic goods, and hence on domestic income, will be smaller. The increase in imports per unit of income constitutes an additional leakage from the circular flow of domestic income at each round of the multiplier process and reduces the value of the autonomous expenditure multiplier. The second term in equation (6.10) shows that, in addition to the elements for a closed economy, autonomous expenditure for an open economy includes the level of exports and the autonomous component of imports. Thus, the changes in their levels are additional shocks that will change equilibrium income. From equation (6.10) we can compute the multiplier effects of changes in X  and M. 1   c 1   c An increase in demand for our exports is an increase in aggregate demand for domestically produced output and will increase demand just as would an increase in government spending or an autonomous increase in investment. In contrast, an autonomous rise in import demand is seen to cause a fall in demand for domestic output and causes equilibrium income to decline. Adam Smith (1723 1790) Regarded as the father of modern Economics. Author of Wealth of Nations. Aggregate monetary resources Broad money without time deposits of post office savings organisation (M3). Automatic stabilisers Under certain spending and tax rules, expenditures that automatically increase or taxes that automatically decrease when economic conditions worsen, therefore, stabilising the economy automatically. Autonomous change A change in the values of variables in a macroeconomic model caused by a factor exogenous to the model. Autonomous expenditure multiplier The ratio of increase (or decrease) in aggregate output or income to an increase (or decrease) in autonomous spending. Balance of payments A set of accounts that summarise a country s transactions with the rest of the world. Balanced budget A budget in which taxes are equal to government spending. Balanced budget multiplier The change in equilibrium output that results from a unit increase or decrease in both taxes and government spending. Bank rate The rate of interest payable by commercial banks to RBI if they borrow money from the latter in case of a shortage of reserves. Barter exchange Exchange of commodities without the mediation of money. Base year The year whose prices are used to calculate the real GDP. Bonds A paper bearing the promise of a stream of future monetary returns over a specified period of time. Issued by firms or governments for borrowing money from the Broad money Narrow money + time deposits held by commercial banks and post office savings organisation. Capital Factor of production which has itself been produced and which is not generally entirely consumed in the production process. Capital gain/loss Increase or decrease in the value of wealth of a bondholder due to an appreciation or reduction in the price of her bonds in the bond market. Capital goods Goods which are bought not for meeting immediate need of the consumer but for producing other goods. Capitalist country or economy A country in which most of the production is carried out by capitalist firms. Capitalist firms These are firms with the following features (a) private ownership of means of production (b) production for the market (c) sale and purchase of labour at a price which is called the wage rate (d) continuous accumulation of capital. Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) The fraction of their deposits which the commercial banks are required to keep with RBI. Circular flow of income The concept that the aggregate value of goods and services produced in an economy is going around in a circular way. Either as factor payments, or as expenditures on goods and services, or as the value of aggregate production. Consumer durables Consumption goods which do not get exhausted immediately but last over a period of time are consumer durables. Consumer Price Index (CPI) Percentage change in the weighted average price level. We take the prices of a given basket of consumption goods. Consumption goods Goods which are consumed by the ultimate consumers or meet the immediate need of the consumer are called consumption goods. It may include services as well. Corporate tax Taxes imposed on the income made by the corporations (or private Currency deposit ratio The ratio of money held by the public in currency to that held as deposits in commercial banks. Deficit financing through central bank borrowing Financing of budget deficit by the government through borrowing money from the central bank. Leads to increase in money supply in an economy and may result in inflation. Depreciation A decrease in the price of the domestic currency in terms of the foreign currency under floating exchange rates. It corresponds to an increase in the exchange Depreciation Wear and tear or depletion which capital stock undergoes over a period Devaluation The decrease in the price of domestic currency under pegged exchange rates through official action. Double coincidence of wants A situation where two economic agents have complementary demand for each others  surplus production. Economic agents or units Economic units or economic agents are those individuals or institutions which take economic decisions. Effective demand principle If the supply of final goods is assumed to be infinitely elastic at constant price over a short period of time, aggregate output is determined solely by the value of aggregate demand. This is called effective demand principle. Entrepreneurship The task of organising, coordinating and risk-taking during Ex ante consumption The value of planned consumption. Ex ante investment The value of planned investment. Ex ante The planned value of a variable as opposed to its actual value. Ex post The actual or realised value of a variable as opposed to its planned value. Expenditure method of calculating national income Method of calculating the national income by measuring the aggregate value of final expenditure for the goods and services produced in an economy over a period of time. Exports Sale of goods and services by the domestic country to the rest of the world. External sector It refers to the economic transaction of the domestic country with the rest of the world. Externalities Those benefits or harms accruing to another person, firm or any other entity which occur because some person, firm or any other entity may be involved in an economic activity. If someone is causing benefits or good externality to another, the latter does not pay the former. If someone is inflicting harm or bad externality to another, the former does not compensate the latter. Fiat money Money with no intrinsic value. Final goods Those goods which do not undergo any further transformation in the Firms Economic units which carry out production of goods and services and employ factors of production. Fiscal policy The policy of the government regarding the level of government spending and transfers and the tax structure. Fixed exchange rate An exchange rate between the currencies of two or more countries that is fixed at some level and adjusted only infrequently. Flexible/floating exchange rate An exchange rate determined by the forces of demand and supply in the foreign exchange market without central bank intervention. Flows Variables which are defined over a period of time. Foreign exchange Foreign currency, all currencies other than the domestic currency of a given country. Foreign exchange reserves Foreign assets held by the central bank of the country. Four factors of production Land, Labour, Capital and Entrepreneurship. Together these help in the production of goods and services. GDP Deflator Ratio of nominal to real GDP. Government expenditure multiplier The numerical coefficient showing the size of the increase in output resulting from each unit increase in government spending. Government The state, which maintains law and order in the country, imposes taxes and fines, makes laws and promotes the economic wellbeing of the citizens. Great Depression The time period of 1930s (started with the stock market crash in New York in 1929) which saw the output in the developed countries fall and unemployment rise by huge amounts. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Aggregate value of goods and services produced within the domestic territory of a country. It includes the replacement investment of the depreciation of capital stock. Gross fiscal deficit The excess of total government expenditure over revenue receipts and capital receipts that do not create debt. Gross investment Addition to capital stock which also includes replacement for the wear and tear which the capital stock undergoes. Gross National Product (GNP) GDP + Net Factor Income from Abroad. In other words GNP includes the aggregate income made by all citizens of the country, whereas GDP includes incomes by foreigners within the domestic economy and excludes incomes earned by the citizens in a foreign economy. Gross primary deficit The fiscal deficit minus interest payments. High powered money Money injected by the monetary authority in the economy. Consists mainly of currency. Households The families or individuals who supply factors of production to the firms and which buy the goods and services from the firms. Imports Purchase of goods and services by the domestic country to the rest of the Income method of calculating national income Method of calculating national income by measuring the aggregate value of final factor payments made (= income) in an economy over a period of time. Interest Payment for services which are provided by capital. Intermediate goods Goods which are used up during the process of production of Inventories The unsold goods, unused raw materials or semi-finished goods which a firm carries from a year to the next. John Maynard Keynes (1883 1946) Arguably the founder of Macroeconomics as a Labour Human physical effort used in production. Land Natural resources used in production either fixed or consumed. Legal tender Money issued by the monetary authority or the government which cannot be refused by anyone. Lender of last resort The function of the monetary authority of a country in which it provides guarantee of solvency to commercial banks in a situation of liquidity crisis or Liquidity trap A situation of very low rate of interest in the economy where every economic agent expects the interest rate to rise in future and consequently bond prices to fall, causing capital loss. Everybody holds her wealth in money and speculative demand for money is infinite. Macroeconomic model Presenting the simplified version of the functioning of a macroeconomy through either analytical reasoning or mathematical, graphical Managed floating A system in which the central bank allows the exchange rate to be determined by market forces but intervene at times to influence the rate. Marginal propensity to consume The ratio of additional consumption to additional Medium of exchange The principal function of money for facilitating commodity Money multiplier The ratio of total money supply to the stock of high powered money in an economy. Narrow money Currency notes, coins and demand deposits held by the public in National disposable income Net National Product at market prices + Other Current Transfers from the rest of the World. Net Domestic Product (NDP) Aggregate value of goods and services produced within the domestic territory of a country which does not include the depreciation of capital Net interest payments made by households Interest payment made by the households to the firms interest payments received by the households. Net investment Addition to capital stock; unlike gross investment, it does not include the replacement for the depletion of capital stock. Net National Product (NNP) (at market price) GNP   depreciation. NNP (at factor cost) or National Income (NI) NNP at market price   (Indirect taxes   Nominal exchange rate The number of units of domestic currency one must give up to get an unit of foreign currency; the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic Nominal (GDP) GDP evaluated at current market prices. Non-tax payments Payments made by households to the firms or the government as non-tax obligations such as fines. Open market operation Purchase or sales of government securities by the central bank from the general public in the bond market in a bid to increase or decrease the money supply in the economy. Paradox of thrift As people become more thrifty they end up saving less or same as before in aggregate. Parametric shift Shift of a graph due to a change in the value of a parameter. Personal Disposable Income (PDI) PI   Personal tax payments   Non-tax payments. Personal Income (PI) NI   Undistributed profits   Net interest payments made by households   Corporate tax + Transfer payments to the households from the government Personal tax payments Taxes which are imposed on individuals, such as income tax. Planned change in inventories Change in the stock of inventories which has occurred in a planned way. Present value (of a bond) That amount of money which, if kept today in an interest earning project, would generate the same income as the sum promised by a bond over Private income Factor income from net domestic product accruing to the private sector + National debt interest + Net factor income from abroad + Current transfers from government + Other net transfers from the rest of the world. Product method of calculating national income Method of calculating the national income by measuring the aggregate value of production taking place in an economy over a period of time. Profit Payment for the services which are provided by entrepreneurship. Public good Goods or services that are collectively consumed; it is not possible to exclude anyone from enjoying their benefits and one person s consumption does not reduce that available to others. Purchasing power parity A theory of international exchange which holds that the price of similar goods in different countries is the same. Real exchange rate The relative price of foreign goods in terms of domestic goods. Real GDP GDP evaluated at a set of constant prices. Rent Payment for services which are provided by land (natural resources). Reserve deposit ratio The fraction of their total deposits which commercial banks keep as reserves. Revaluation A decrease in the exchange rate in a pegged exchange rate system which makes the foreign currency cheaper in terms of the domestic currency. Revenue deficit The excess of revenue expenditure over revenue receipts. Ricardian equivalence The theory that consumers are forward looking and anticipate that government borrowing today will mean a tax increase in the future to repay the debt, and will adjust consumption accordingly so that it will have the same effect on the economy as a tax increase today. Speculative demand Demand for money as a store of wealth. Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) The fraction of their total demand and time deposits which the commercial banks are required by RBI to invest in specified liquid assets. Sterilisation Intervention by the monetary authority of a country in the money market to keep the money supply stable against exogenous or sometimes external shocks such as an increase in foreign exchange inflow. Stocks Those variables which are defined at a point of time. Store of value Wealth can be stored in the form of money for future use. This function of money is referred to as store of value. Transaction demand Demand for money for carrying out transactions. Transfer payments to households from the government and firms Transfer payments are payments which are made without any counterpart of services received by the payer. For examples, gifts, scholarships, pensions. Undistributed profits That part of profits earned by the private and government owned firms which are not distributed among the factors of production. Unemployment rate This may be defined as the number of people who were unable to find a job (though they were looking for jobs), as a ratio of total number of people who were looking for jobs. Unit of account The role of money as a yardstick for measuring and comparing values of different commodities. Unplanned change in inventories Change in the stock of inventories which has occurred in an unexpected way. Value added Net contribution made by a firm in the process of production. It is defined as, Value of production   Value of intermediate goods used. Wage Payment for the services which are rendered by labour. Wholesale Price Index (WPI) Percentage change in the weighted average price level. We take the prices of a given basket of goods which is traded in bulk. 1.1 A SIMPLE ECONOMY Think of any society. People in the society need many goods and services1 in their everyday life including food, clothing, shelter, transport facilities like roads and railways, postal services and Every individual has some amount of only a few of the goods and have some yarn, some cotton and other instruments required for to impart education to the students. Some others in society may these decision making units can produce some goods or services by using the resources that it has and use part of the produce to obtain the many other goods and services which it needs. For for consumption purposes and procure clothing, housing and money by teaching students in the school and use the money for working for someone else. Each individual can thus use her resources to fulfill her needs. It goes without saying that no individual has unlimited resources compared to her needs. The amount of corn that the family farm can produce is limited by the 1By goods we means physical, tangible objects used to satisfy people s wants and needs. The term  goods  should be contrasted with the term  services, which captures the intangible satisfaction of wants and needs. As compared to food items and clothes, which are examples of goods, we can think of the tasks that doctors and teachers perform for us as examples of services. 2By individual, we mean an individual decision making unit. A decision making unit can be a single person or a group like a household, a firm or any other organisation. 3By resource, we mean those goods and services which are used to produce other goods and services, e.g. land, labour, tools and machinery, etc. more and better education for the children, it may have to give up some of the In general, every individual in society is engaged in the production of some goods or services and she wants a combination of many goods and services not all of which are produced by her. Needless to say that there has to be some compatibility between what people in society collectively want to have and what they produce4. For example, the total amount of corn produced by family farm along with other farming units in a society must match the total amount of corn that people in the society collectively want to consume. If people in the society do not want as much corn as the farming units are capable of producing collectively, a part of the resources of these units could have been used in the production of some other good or services which is in high demand. On the other hand, if people in the society want more corn compared to what the farming units are producing collectively, the resources used in the production of some other goods and services may be reallocated to the production of corn. Similar is the case with all other goods or services. Just as the resources of an individual are scarce, the resources of the society are also scarce in comparison to what the people in the society might collectively want to have. The scarce resources of the society have to be allocated properly in the production of different goods and services in keeping with the likes and dislikes of the people of the society. thus produced will have to be distributed among the individuals of the society. In reality, any economy is much more complex compared to the society 1.2 CENTRAL PROBLEMS OF AN ECONOMY Production, exchange and consumption of goods and services are among the basic economic activities of life. In the course of these basic economic activities, every society has to face scarcity of resources and it is the scarcity of resources that gives rise to the problem of choice. The scarce resources of an economy have competing usages. In other words, every society has to decide on how to use its scarce resources. The problems of an economy are very often summarised 4Here we assume that all the goods and services produced in a society are consumed by the people in the society and that there is no scope of getting anything from outside the society. In reality, this is not true. However, the general point that is being made here about the compatibility of production and consumption of goods and services holds for any country or even for the entire world. 5By an allocation of the resources, we mean how much of which resource is devoted to the production of each of the goods and services. What is produced and in what quantities? Every society must decide on how much of each of the many possible goods and services it will produce. Whether to produce more of food, clothing, housing or to have more of luxury goods. Whether to have more agricultural goods or to have industrial products and services. Whether to use more resources in education and health or to use more resources in building military services. Whether to have more of basic education or more of higher education. Whether to have more of consumption goods or to have investment goods (like machine) which will boost production and consumption tomorrow. How are these goods produced? Every society has to decide on how much of which of the resources to use in the production of each of the different goods and services. Whether to use more labour or more machines. Which of the available technologies to adopt in the production of each of the goods? For whom are these goods produced? Who gets how much of the goods that are produced in the economy? How should the produce of the economy be distributed among the individuals in the economy? Who gets more and who gets less? Whether or not to ensure a minimum amount of consumption for everyone in the economy. Whether or not elementary education and basic health services should be available freely for everyone in the economy. Thus, every economy faces the problem of allocating the scarce resources to the production of different possible goods and services and of distributing the produced goods and services among the individuals within the economy. The allocation of scarce resources and the distribution of the final goods and services are the central problems of any economy. Production Possibility Frontier Just as individuals face scarcity of resources, the resources of an economy as a whole are always limited in comparison to what the people in the economy collectively want to have. The scarce resources have alternative usages and every society has to decide on how much of each of the resources to use in the production of different goods and services. In other words, every society has to determine how to allocate its scarce resources to different goods and services. An allocation of the scarce resource of the economy gives rise to a particular combination of different goods and services. Given the total amount of resources, it is possible to allocate the resources in many different ways and, thereby achieving different mixes of all possible goods and services. The collection of all possible combinations of the goods and services that can be produced from a given amount of resources and a given stock of technological knowledge is called the production possibility set of the economy. Consider an economy which can produce corn or cotton by using its resources. Table 1.1 gives some of the combinations of corn and cotton that the economy can produce. When its resources are fully utilised. Table1.1: Production Possibilities If all the resources are used in the production of corn, the maximum amount of corn that can be produced is 4 units and if all resources are used in the production of cotton, at the most, 10 units of cotton can be produced. The economy can also produce1 unit of corn and 9 units of cotton or 2 units of corn and 7 units of cotton or 3 units of corn and 4 units of cotton. There can be many other possibilities. The figure illustrates the production possibilities of the economy. Any point on or below the curve represents a combination of corn and cotton that can be produced with the economy s resources. The curve gives the maximum amount of corn that can be produced in the economy for any given amount of cotton and vice-versa. This curve is called the production possibility The production possibility frontier gives the combinations of corn and cotton that can be produced when the resources of the economy are fully utilised. Note that a point lying strictly below the production possibility frontier represents a combination of corn and cotton that will be produced when all or some of the resources are either underemployed or are utilised in a wasteful fashion. If more of the scarce resources are used in the production of corn, less resources are available for the production of cotton and vice versa. Therefore, if we want to have more of one of the goods, we will have less of the other good. Thus, there is always a cost of having a little more of one good in terms of the amount of the other good that has to be forgone. This is known as the opportunity costa of an additional unit of the Every economy has to choose one of the many possibilities that it has. In other words, one of the central problems of the economy is to choose from one of the many production possibilities. aNote that the concept of opportunity cost is applicable to the individual as well as the society. The concept is very important and is widely used in economics. Because of its importance in economics, sometimes, opportunity cost is also called the economic cost. 1.3 ORGANISATION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Basic problems can be solved either by the free interaction of the individuals pursuing their own objectives as is done in the market or in a planned manner by some central authority like the government. 1.3.1 The Centrally Planned Economy In a centrally planned economy, the government or the central authority plans all the important activities in the economy. All important decisions regarding production, exchange and consumption of goods and services are made by the government. The central authority may try to achieve a particular allocation of resources and a consequent distribution of the final combination of goods and services which is thought to be desirable for society as a whole. For example, if it is found that a good or service which is very important for the prosperity and well-being of the economy as a whole, e.g. education or health service, is not produced in adequate amount by the individuals on their own, the government might try to induce the individuals to produce adequate amount of such a good or service or, alternatively, the government may itself decide to produce the good or service in question. In a different context, if some people in the economy get so little a share of the final mix of goods and services produced in the economy that their survival is at stake, then the central authority may intervene and try to achieve an equitable distribution of the final mix of goods and services. 1.3.2 The Market Economy In contrast to a centrally planned economy, in a market economy, all economic activities are organised through the market. A market, as studied in economics, is an institution6 which organises the free interaction of individuals pursuing their respective economic activities. In other words, a market is a set of arrangements where economic agents can freely exchange their endowments or products with each other. It is important to note that the term  market  as used in economics is quite different from the common sense understanding of a market. In particular, it has nothing as such to do with the marketplace as you might tend to think of. For buying and selling commodities, individuals may or may not meet each other in an actual physical location. Interaction between buyers and sellers can take place in a variety of situations such as a village- chowk or a super bazaar in a city, or alternatively, buyers and sellers can interact with each other through telephone or internet and conduct the exchange of commodities. The arrangements which allow people to buy and sell commodities freely are the defining features of a market. For the smooth functioning of any system, it is imperative that there is coordination in the activities of the different constituent parts of the system. Otherwise, there can be chaos. Y ou may wonder as to what are the forces which bring the coordination between the activities of millions of isolated individuals in a market system. In a market system, all goods or services come with a price (which is mutually agreed upon by the buyers and sellers) at which the exchanges take place. The price reflects, on an average, the society s valuation of the good or service in question. If the buyers demand more of a certain good, the price of that good will rise. This signals to the producers of that good that the society as a whole wants more of that good than is currently being produced and the producers of the good, in their turn, are likely to increase their production. In this way, prices of goods and services send important information to all the individuals across the market and help achieve coordination in a market system. Thus, in a market system, the central problems regarding how much and what to produce are solved through the coordination of economic activities brought about by the In reality, all economies are mixed economies where some important decisions are taken by the government and the economic activities are by and large conducted through the market. The only difference is in terms of the extent of the role of the government in deciding the course of economic activities. In the United States of America, the role of the government is minimal. The closest example of a centrally planned economy is the China for the major part of the twentieth century. In India, since Independence, the government has played a major role in planning economic activities. However, the role of the 6An institution is usually defined as an organisation with some purpose. government in the Indian economy has been reduced considerably in the last couple of decades. 1.4  POSITIVE AND NORMATIVE ECONOMICS It was mentioned earlier that in principle there are more than one ways of solving the central problems of an economy. These different mechanisms in general are likely to give rise to different solutions to those problems, thereby resulting in different allocations of the resources and also different distributions of the final mix of goods and services produced in the economy. Therefore, it is important to understand which of these alternative mechanisms is more desirable for the economy as a whole. In economics, we try to analyse the different mechanisms and figure out the outcomes which are likely to result under each of these mechanisms. We also try to evaluate the mechanisms by studying how desirable the outcomes resulting from them are. Often a distinction is made between positive economic analysis and normative economic analysis depending on whether we are trying to figure out how a particular mechanism functions or we are trying to evaluate it. In positive economic analysis, we study how the different mechanisms function, and in normative economics, we try to understand whether these mechanisms are desirable or not. However, this distinction between positive and normative economic analysis is not a very sharp one. The positive and the normative issues involved in the study of the central economic problems are very closely related to each other and a proper understanding of one is not possible in isolation to the other. 1.5  MICROECONOMICS AND MACROECONOMICS, the subject matter of economics has been studied under two broad branches: Microeconomics and Macroeconomics. In microeconomics, we study the behaviour of individual economic agents in the markets for different goods and services and try to figure out how prices and quantities of goods and services are determined through the interaction of individuals in these markets. In macroeconomics, on the other hand, we try to get an understanding of the economy as a whole by focusing our attention on aggregate measures such as total output, employment and aggregate price level. Here, we are interested in finding out how the levels of these aggregate measures are determined and how the levels of these aggregate measures change over time. Some of the important questions that are studied in macroeconomics are as follows: What is the level of total output in the economy? How is the total output determined? How does the total output grow over time? Are the resources of the economy (eg labour) fully employed? What are the reasons behind the unemployment of resources? Why do prices rise? Thus, instead of studying the different markets as is done in microeconomics, in macroeconomics, we try to study the behaviour of aggregate or macro measures of the performance of the economy. 1.6  PLAN OF THE BOOK This book is meant to introduce you to the basic ideas in microeconomics. In this book, we will focus on the behaviour of the individual consumers and producers of a single commodity and try to analyse how the price and the quantity is determined in the market for a single commodity. In Chapter 2, we Centrally planned economy Discuss the central problems of an economy. What do you mean by the production possibilities of an economy? What is a production possibility frontier? Discuss the subject matter of economics. Distinguish between a centrally planned economy and a market economy. What do you understand by positive economic analysis? What do you understand by normative economic analysis? Distinguish between microeconomics and macroeconomics. shall study the consumer  s behaviour. Chapter 3 deals with basic ideas of production and cost. In Chapter 4, we study the producer  s behaviour. In Chapter 5, we shall study how price and quantity is determined in a perfectly competitive market for a commodity. Chapter 6 studies some other forms of market. In this chapter, we will study the behaviour of an individual consumer. The consumer has to decide how to spend her income on different goods1. Economists call this the problem of choice. Most naturally, any consumer will want to get a combination of goods that gives her maximum satisfaction. What will be this  best  combination? This depends on the likes of the consumer and what the consumer can afford to buy. The  likes  of the consumer are also called  preferences. And what the consumer can afford to buy, depends on prices of the goods and the income of the consumer. This chapter presents two different approaches that explain consumer behaviour (i) Cardinal Utility Analysis and (ii) Ordinal Preliminary Notations and Assumptions A consumer, in general, consumes many goods; but for simplicity, we shall consider the consumer s choice problem in a situation where there are only two goods2: bananas and mangoes. Any combination of the amount of the two goods will be called a consumption bundle or, in short, a bundle. In general, we shall use the variable x1 to denote the quantity of bananas and x2 to denote the quantity of mangoes. x1 and x2 can be positive or zero. (x1, x2) would mean the bundle consisting of x1 quantity of bananas and x2 quantity of mangoes. For particular values of x1 and x2, (x1, x2), would give us a particular bundle. For example, the bundle (5,10) consists of 5 bananas and 10 mangoes; the bundle (10, 5) consists of 10 bananas and 5 mangoes. A consumer usually decides his demand for a commodity on the basis of utility (or satisfaction) that he derives from it. What is utility? Utility of a commodity is its want-satisfying capacity. The more the need of a commodity or the stronger the desire to have it, the greater is the utility derived from the commodity. Utility is subjective. Different individuals can get different levels of utility from the same commodity. For example, some one who 1We shall use the term goods to mean goods as well as services. 2The assumption that there are only two goods simplifies the analysis considerably and allows us to understand some important concepts by using simple diagrams. likes chocolates will get much higher utility from a chocolate than some one who is not so fond of chocolates, Also, utility that one individual gets from the commodity can change with change in place and time. For example, utility from the use of a room heater will depend upon whether the individual is in Ladakh or Chennai (place) or whether it is summer or winter (time). 2.1.1 Cardinal Utility Analysis Cardinal utility analysis assumes that level of utility can be expressed in numbers. For example, we can measure the utility derived from a shirt and say, this shirt gives me 50 units of utility. Before discussing further, it will be useful to have a look at two important measures of utility. Measures of Utility Total Utility: Total utility of a fixed quantity of a commodity (TU) is the total satisfaction derived from consuming the given amount of some commodity x. More of commodity x provides more satisfaction to the consumer. TU depends on the quantity of the commodity consumed. Therefore, TUn refers to total utility derived from consuming n units of a commodity x. Marginal Utility: Marginal utility (MU) is the change in total utility due to consumption of one additional unit of a commodity. For example, suppose 4 bananas give us 28 units of total utility and 5 bananas give us 30 units of total utility. Clearly, consumption of the 5th banana has caused total utility to increase by 2 units (30 units minus 28 units). Therefore,  marginal utility of the 5th banana is 2 units. MU5 =  TU5   TU4 = 30   28 = 2 In general, MUn = TUn   TUn-1, where subscript n refers to the nth unit of the Total utility and marginal utility can also be related in the following way. TUn = MU1 + MU2 +   + MUn-1 + MUn This simply means that TU derived from consuming n units of bananas is the sum total of marginal utility of first banana (MU1), marginal utility of second banana (MU2), and so on, till the marginal utility of the nth unit. Table No. 2.1 and Figure 2.1 show an imaginary example of the values of marginal and total utility derived from consumption of various amounts of a commodity. Usually, it is seen that the marginal utility diminishes with increase in consumption of the commodity. This happens because having obtained some amount of the commodity, the desire of the consumer to have still more of it becomes weaker. The same is also shown in the table and graph. Table 2.1: Values of marginal and total utility derived from consumption of various amounts of a commodity Theory of Consumer Total Utility     Marginal Utility Notice that MU3 is less than MU2. You may also notice that total utility increases but at a diminishing rate: The rate of change in total utility due to change in quantity of commodity consumed is a measure of marginal utility. This marginal utility diminishes with increase commodity from 12 to 6, 6 to 4 and so on. This follows from the law of diminishing marginal utility. Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility states that marginal utility from consuming each additional unit of a commodity declines as its consumption increases, while keeping consumption of other commodities MU becomes zero at a level when TU remains constant. In the example, TU does not change at 5th unit of consumption and therefore MU5= 0. Thereafter, TU starts falling and MU becomes negative. Derivation of Demand Curve in the Case of a Single Commodity (Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility) Cardinal utility analysis can be used to derive demand curve for a commodity. What is demand and what is demand curve? The quantity of a commodity that a consumer is willing to buy and is able to afford, given prices of goods and income of the consumer, is called demand for that commodity. Demand for a commodity x, apart from the price of x itself, depends on factors such as prices of other commodities (see substitutes and complements 2.4.4), income of the consumer and tastes and preferences of the consumers. Demand curve is a graphic presentation of various quantities of a commodity that a consumer is willing to buy at different prices of the same commodity, while holding constant prices of other related commodities and income of the consumer. Figure 2.2 presents hypothetical demand curve of an individual for commodity x at its different prices. Quantity is measured along the horizontal axis and price is measured along the vertical axis. The downward sloping demand curve shows that at lower prices, the individual is willing to buy more of commodity x; at higher prices, she is willing to buy less of commodity x. Therefore, there is a negative relationship between price of a commodity and quantity demanded which is referred to as the Law of Demand. An explaination for a downward sloping demand curve rests on the notion of diminishing marginal utility. The law of diminishing marginal utility states that each successive unit of a commodity provides lower marginal utility. Demand curve of an individual for The values of marginal and total utility derived from consumption of various amounts of a commodity. The marginal utility diminishes with increase in consumption of the commodity. Theory of Consumer Therefore the individual will not be willing to pay as much for each additional unit and this results in a downward sloping demand curve. At a price of Rs. 40 per unit x, individual s demand for x was 5 units. The 6th unit of commodity x will be worth less than the 5th unit. The individual will be willing to buy the 6th unit only when the price drops below Rs. 40 per unit. Hence, the law of diminishing marginal utility explains why demand curves have a negative slope. 2.1.2 Ordinal Utility Analysis Cardinal utility analysis is simple to understand, but suffers from a major drawback in the form of quantification of utility in numbers. In real life, we never express utility in the form of numbers. At the most, we can rank various alternative combinations in terms of having more or less utility. In other words, the consumer does not measure utility in numbers, though she often ranks various consumption bundles. This forms the starting point of this topic   Ordinal A consumer s preferences over the set of available bundles can often be represented diagrammatically. We have already seen that the bundles available to the consumer can be plotted as points in a two- dimensional diagram. The points representing bundles which give the consumer equal utility can generally be joined to obtain a curve like the one in Figure 2.3. The consumer is said to be indifferent on the different bundles because each point of the bundles give the consumer equal utility.  Such a curve joining all points representing bundles among which the consumer is indifferent is called an indifference curve. All the points such as A, B, C and D lying on an indifference curve provide the consumer with the same level of satisfaction. It is clear that when a consumer gets one more banana, he has to forego some mangoes, so that her total utility level remains the same and she remains on the same indifference curve. Therefore, indifference curve slopes downward. The amount of mangoes that the consumer has to forego, in order to get an additional banana, her total utility level being the same, is called marginal rate of substitution (MRS). In other words, MRS is simply the rate at which the consumer will substitute bananas for mangoes, so that her total utility remains One can notice that, in the table 2.2, as we increase the quantity of bananas, the quantity of mangoes sacrificed for each additional banana declines. In other words, MRS diminishes with increase in the number of bananas. As the number | means that MRS equals only the magnitude of the expression it means MRS=3. Indifference curve. An indifference curve joins all points representing bundles which are considered indifferent by the consumer. of bananas with the consumer increases, the MU derived from each additional banana falls. Similarly, with the fall in quantity of mangoes, the marginal utility derived from mangoes increases. So, with increase in the number of bananas, the consumer will feel the inclination to sacrifice small and smaller amounts of mangoes. This tendency for the MRS to fall with increase in quantity of bananas is known as Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution. This can be seen from figure 2.3 also. Going from point A to point B, the consumer sacrifices 3 mangoes for 1 banana, going from point B to point C, the consumer sacrifices 2 mangoes for 1 banana, and going from point C to point D, the consumer sacrifices just 1 mango for 1 banana. Thus, it is clear that the consumer sacrifices smaller and smaller quantities of mangoes for each additional banana. Shape of an Indifference Curve It may be mentioned that the law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution causes an indifference curve to be convex to the origin. This is the most common shape of an indifference curve. But in case of goods being perfect substitutes4, the marginal rate of substitution does not diminish. It remains the same. Let s take an example. Here, the consumer is indifferent for all these combinations as long as the total of five rupee coins and five rupee notes remains the same. For the consumer, it hardly matters whether she gets a five rupee coin or a five rupee note. So, irrespective of how many five rupee notes she has, the consumer will sacrifice only one five rupee coin for a five rupee note. So these two commodities are perfect substitutes for the consumer and indifference curve depicting these will be a straight line. In the figure.2.4, it can be seen that consumer sacrifices the same number of five-rupee coins each time he has an additional five-rupee note. Table 2.2: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution Combination    Quantity of bananas (Qx)  Quantity of Mangoes (Qy)     MRS A                                    1                                              15                              - B                                    2                                              12                           3:1 C                                    3                                               10                          2:1 D                                   4                                                 9                           1:1 Table 2.3: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution Combination             Quantity of five                      Quantity of five               MRS Rupees notes (Qx)                 Rupees coins  (Qy) A                                    1                                               8                                 - B                                    2                                               7                               1:1 C                                    3                                               6                                1:1 D                                   4                                                5                               1:1 4 Perfect Substitutes are the goods which can be used in place of each other, and provide exactly the same level of utility to the consumer. Theory of Consumer Map. A family of indifference curves. The arrow indicates that bundles on higher indifference curves are preferred by the consumer to the bundles on lower indifference curves. Slope of the Indifference Curve. The indifference curve slopes downward. An increase in the amount of bananas along the indifference curve is associated with a decrease in the amount of mangoes. If  x1 > 0 then  x2 < 0. The consumer s preferences over all the bundles can be represented by a family of indifference curves as shown in Figure 2.5. This is called an indifference map of the consumer. All points on an indifference curve represent bundles which are considered indifferent by the consumer. Monotonicity of preferences imply that between any two indifference curves, the bundles on the one which lies above are preferred to the bundles on the one which lies below. Features of Indifference Curve downwards from left to right: An indifference curve slopes downwards from left to right, which means that in order to have more of bananas, the consumer has to forego some mangoes. If the consumer does not forego some mangoes with an increase in number of bananas, it will mean consumer having more of bananas with same number of mangoes, taking her to a higher indifference curve. Thus, as long as the consumer is on the same indifference curve, an increase in bananas must be compensated by a fall in quantity of assumed to be such that between any two bundles (x1, x2) and (y1, y2), if (x1, x2) has more of at least one of the goods and no less of the other good compared to (y1, y2), then the consumer prefers (x1, x2) to (y1, y2). Preferences of this kind are called monotonic preferences. Thus, a monotonic if and only if between any two bundles, the consumer prefers the bundle which has more of at least one of the goods and no less of the other good as compared to the other bundle. substitutes. Indifference curve depicting two commodities which are perfect substitutes is a straight line. Consider the different combination of bananas and mangoes, A, B and C depicted in table 2.4 and figure 2.7. Combinations A, B and C consist of same quantity of mangoes but different quantities of bananas. Since combination B has more bananas than A, B will provide the individual a higher level of satisfaction than A. Therefore, B will lie on a higher indifference curve than A, depicting higher satisfaction. Likewise, C has more bananas than B (quantity of mangoes is the same in both B and C). Therefore, C will provide higher level of satisfaction than B, and also lie on a higher indifference curve than B. A higher indifference curve consisting of combinations with more of mangoes, or more of Table 2.4: Representation of different level of utilities from different combination Combination                      Quantity of bananas               Quantity of Mangoes A                                                  1                                                10 B                                                  2                                                10 C                                                  3                                                10 2.Higher indifference curve gives greater level of utility: As long as marginal utility of a commodity is positive, an individual will always prefer more of that commodity, as more of the commodity will increase the level bananas, or more of both, will represent combinations that give higher level of satisfaction. 3.Two indifference curves never intersect each other: Two indifference curves intersecting each other will lead to conflicting results. To explain this, let us allow two indifference curves to intersect each other as shown in the figure 2.8. As points A and B lie on the same indifference curve IC1, utilities derived from combination A and combination B will give the same level of satisfaction. Similarly, as points A and C lie on the same indifference curve IC2, utility derived from combination A and from combination C will give the same level of satisfaction. Higher indifference curves give greater level Two indifference curves never intersect Theory of Consumer From this, it follows that utility from point B and from point C will also be the same. But this is clearly an absurd result, as on point B, the consumer gets a greater number of mangoes with the same quantity of bananas. So consumer is better off at point B than at point C. Thus, it is clear that intersecting indifference curves will lead to conflicting results. Thus, two indifference curves cannot intersect each other. 2.2 THE CONSUMER S BUDGET Let us consider a consumer who has only a fixed amount of money (income) to spend on two goods. The prices of the goods are given in the market. The consumer cannot buy any and every combination of the two goods that she may want to consume. The consumption bundles that are available to the consumer depend on the prices of the two goods and the income of the consumer. Given her fixed income and the prices of the two goods, the consumer can afford to buy only those bundles which cost her less than or equal to her income. 2.2.1 Budget Set and Budget Line Suppose the income of the consumer is M and the prices of bananas and mangoes are p1 and p2 respectively5. If the consumer wants to buy x1 quantities of bananas, she will have to spend p1x1 amount of money. Similarly, if the consumer wants to buy x2 quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p2x2 amount of money. Therefore, if the consumer wants to buy the bundle consisting of x1 quantities of bananas and x2 quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p1x1 + p2x2 amount of money. She can buy this bundle only if she has at least p1x1 + p2x2 amount of money. Given the prices of the goods and the income of a consumer, she can choose any bundle as long as it costs less than or equal to the income she has. In other words, the consumer can buy any bundle (x1, x2) such that p1x1 + p2x2   M The inequality (2.1) is called the consumer s budget constraint. The set of bundles available to the consumer is called the budget set. The budget set is thus the collection of all bundles that the consumer can buy with her income at the prevailing market prices. Consider, for example, a consumer who has Rs 20, and suppose, both the goods are priced at Rs 5 and are available only in integral units. The bundles that this consumer can afford to buy are: (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (0, 4), (1, 0), (1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 0), (2, 1), (2, 2), (3, 0), (3, 1) and (4, 0). Among these bundles, (0, 4), (1,3), (2, 2), (3, 1) and (4, 0) cost exactly Rs 20 and all the other bundles cost less than Rs 20. The consumer cannot afford to buy bundles like (3, 3) and (4, 5) because they cost more than Rs 20 at the prevailing prices. 5 Price of a good is the amount of money that the consumer has to pay per unit of the good she wants to buy. If rupee is the unit of money and quantity of the good is measured in kilograms, the price of banana being p1 means the consumer has to pay p1 rupees per kilograms of banana that she wants to buy. If both the goods are perfectly divisible6, the consumer s budget set would consist of all bundles (x1, x2) such that x1 and x2 are any numbers greater than or equal to 0 and p1x1 + p2x2   M. The budget set can be represented in a diagram as in Figure All bundles in the positive quadrant which are on or below the line are included in the budget set. The equation of the line is p1x1 + p2x2 = M The line consists of all bundles which cost exactly equal to M. This line is called the budget line. Points below the budget line represent bundles which cost strictly less than M. The equation (2.2) can also be written as7 The budget line is a straight line with horizontal intercept p  and vertical p. The horizontal intercept represents the bundle that the consumer can buy if she spends her entire income on bananas. Similarly, the vertical intercept represents the bundle that the consumer can buy if she spends her entire income on mangoes. The slope of the budget line is Price Ratio and the Slope of the Budget Line Think of any point on the budget line. Such a point represents a bundle which costs the consumer her entire budget. Now suppose the consumer wants to have one more banana. She can do it only if she gives up some amount of the other good. How many mangoes does she have to give up if she wants to have an extra quantity of bananas? It would depend on the prices of the two goods. A quantity of banana costs p1. Therefore, she will have to reduce her expenditure on mangoes by p1 amount, if she wants one more quantity of banana. With p1, she could buy quantities of mangoes. Therefore, if the consumer wants to have an extra quantity of bananas when she is spending all her money, she will have to give up quantities of mangoes. In other words, in the given market 6The goods considered in Example 2.1 were not divisible and were available only in integer units. There are many goods which are divisible in the sense that they are available in non-integer units also. It is not possible to buy half an orange or one-fourth of a banana, but it is certainly possible to buy half a kilogram of rice or one-fourth of a litre of milk. 7In school mathematics, you have learnt the equation of a straight line as y = c + mx where c is the vertical intercept and m is the  slope of the straight line. Note that equation (2.3) has the same form. Budget Set. Quantity of bananas is measured along the horizontal axis and quantity of mangoes is measured along the vertical axis. Any point in the diagram represents a bundle of the two goods. The budget set consists of all points on or below the straight line having the equation p1x1 + p2x2 = M. Theory of Consumer conditions, the consumer can substitute bananas for mangoes at the rate The absolute value8 of the slope of the budget line measures the rate at which the consumer is able to substitute bananas for mangoes when she spends her 2.2.2 Changes in the Budget Set The set of available bundles depends on the prices of the two goods and the income of the consumer. When the price of either of the goods or the consumer s income changes, the set of available bundles is also likely to change. Suppose the consumer s income changes from M to M  but the prices of the two goods remain unchanged. With the new income, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles (x1, x2) such that p1x1 + p2x2   M. Now the equation of the budget line is p1x1 + p2x2 = M  Equation (2.8) can also be written as Note that the slope of the new budget line is the same as the slope of the budget line prior to the change in the consumer s income. However, the vertical intercept has changed after the change in income. If there is an increase in the 8The absolute value of a number x is equal to x if x   0 and is equal to   x if x < 0. The absolute value of x is usually denoted by |x|. Derivation of the Slope of the The slope of the budget line measures the amount of change in mangoes required per unit of change in bananas along the budget line. Consider any two points (x1, x2) and (x1 +  x1, x2 +  x2) on the budget line.a It must be the case that p1x1 + p2x2 = M and, p1(x1 +  x1) + p2(x2 +  x2) = M Subtracting (2.4) from (2.5), we obtain p1 x1 + p2 x2 = 0 By rearranging terms in (2.6), we obtain a  (delta) is a Greek letter. In mathematics,   is sometimes used to denote  a change. Thus,  x1 stands for a change in x1 and  x2 stands for a change in x2. income, i.e. if M' > M, the vertical as well as horizontal intercepts increase, there is a parallel outward shift of the budget line. If the income increases, the consumer can buy more of the goods at the prevailing market prices. Similarly, if the income goes down, i.e. if M' < M, both intercepts decrease, and hence, there is a parallel inward shift of the budget line. If income goes down, the availability of goods goes down. Changes in the set of available bundles resulting from changes in consumer s income when the prices of the two goods remain unchanged are shown in Figure 2.10. Now suppose the price of bananas change from p1 to p'1 but the price of mangoes and the consumer s income remain unchanged. At the new price of bananas, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles (x1,x2) such that p'1x1 + p2x2   M. The equation of the budget line is p'1x1 + p2x2 = M Equation (2.10) can also be written as Note that the vertical intercept of the new budget line is the same as the vertical intercept of the budget line prior to the change in the price of bananas. However, the slope of the budget line and horizontal intercept have changed after the price change. If the price of bananas increases, ie if p'1> p1, the absolute value of the slope of the budget line increases, and the budget line becomes steeper (it pivots inwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept decreases). If the price of bananas decreases, i.e., p'1< p1, the absolute value of the slope of the budget line decreases and hence, the budget line becomes flatter (it pivots outwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept increases). Figure 2.11 shows change in the budget set when the price of only one commodity changes while the price of the other commodity as well as income of the consumer are constant. A change in price of mangoes, when price of bananas and the consumer s income remain unchanged, will bring about similar changes in the budget set of Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the Consumer s Income. A decrease in income causes a parallel inward shift of the budget line as in panel (a). An increase in income causes a parallel outward shift of the budget line as in panel (b). Theory of Consumer 2.3 OPTIMAL CHOICE OF THE CONSUMER The budget set consists of all bundles that are available to the consumer. The consumer can choose her consumption bundle from the budget set. But on what basis does she choose her consumption bundle from the ones that are available to her? In economics, it is assumed that the consumer chooses her consumption bundle on the basis of her  tatse and preferences over  the bundles in the budget set. It is generally assumed that the consumer has well defined preferences over the set of all possible bundles. She can compare any two bundles. In other words, between any two bundles, she either prefers one to the other or she is indifferent between the two. Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the Price of bananas. An increase in the price of bananas makes the budget line steeper as in panel (a). A decrease in the price of bananas makes the budget line flatter as in panel (b). Equality of the Marginal Rate of Substitution and the Ratio of The optimum bundle of the consumer is located at the point where the budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. If the budget line is tangent to an indifference curve at a point, the absolute value of the slope of the indifference curve (MRS) and that of the budget line (price ratio) are same at that point. Recall from our earlier discussion that the slope of the indifference curve is the rate at which the consumer is willing to substitute one good for the other. The slope of the budget line is the rate at which the consumer is able to substitute one good for the other in the market. At the optimum, the two rates should be the same. To see why, consider a point where this is not so. Suppose the MRS at such a point is 2 and suppose the two goods have the same price. At this point, the consumer is willing to give up 2 mangoes if she is given an extra banana. But in the market, she can buy an extra banana if she gives up just 1 mango. Therefore, if she buys an extra banana, she can have more of both the goods compared to the bundle represented by the point, and hence, move to a preferred bundle. Thus, a point at which the MRS is greater, the price ratio cannot be the optimum. A similar argument holds for any point at which the MRS is less than the price ratio. In economics, it is generally assumed that the consumer is a rational individual. A rational individual clearly knows what is good or what is bad for her, and in any given situation, she always tries to achieve the best for herself. Thus, not only does a consumer have well-defined preferences over the set of available bundles, she also acts according to her preferences. From the bundles which are available to her, a rational consumer always chooses the one which gives her maximum satisfaction. In the earlier sections, it was observed that the budget set describes the bundles that are available to the consumer and her preferences over the available bundles can usually be represented by an indifference map. Therefore, the consumer s problem can also be stated as follows: The rational consumer s problem is to move to a point on the highest possible indifference curve given her budget set. If such a point exists, where would it be located? The optimum point would be located on the budget line. A point below the budget line cannot be the optimum. Compared to a point below the budget line, there is always some point on the budget line which contains more of at least one of the goods and no less of the other, and is, therefore, preferred by a consumer whose preferences are monotonic. Therefore, if the consumer s preferences are monotonic, for any point below the budget line, there is some point on the budget line which is preferred by the consumer. Points above the budget line are not available to the consumer. Therefore, the optimum (most preferred) bundle of the consumer would be on the budget line. Where on the budget line will the optimum bundle be located? The point at which the budget line just touches (is tangent to), one of the indifference curves would be the optimum.9 To see why this is so, note that any point on the budget line other than the point at which it touches the indifference curve lies on a lower indifference curve and hence is inferior. Therefore, such a point cannot be the consumer s optimum. The optimum bundle is located on the budget line at the point where the budget line is tangent to an indifference curve. Figure 2.12 illustrates the consumer s optimum. At budget line is tangent to the black coloured indifference curve. The first thing to note is that the indifference curve just touching the budget line is the highest possible indifference curve given the consumer s budget set. Bundles on the indifference curves above this, like the grey one, are not affordable. Points on the indifference curves below this, like the blue one, are certainly inferior to the points on the indifference curve, just touching the budget line. Any other point on the budget line lies on a lower indifference curve and hence, is inferior is the consumer s optimum bundle. 9 To be more precise, if the situation is as depicted in Figure 2.12 then the optimum would be located at the point where the budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. However, there are other situations in which the optimum is at a point where the consumer spends her entire income on one of the goods only. Consumer s Optimum. The point (x   1, x   2 ), at which the budget line is tangent to an indifference curve represents the consumers Theory of Consumer In the previous section, we studied the choice problem of the consumer and derived the consumer s optimum bundle given the prices of the goods, the consumer s income and her preferences. It was observed that the amount of a good that the consumer chooses optimally, depends on the price of the good itself, the prices of other goods, the consumer s income and her tastes and preferences. The quantity of a commodity that a consumer is willing to buy and is able to afford, given prices of goods and consumer s tastes and preferences is called demand for the commodity. Whenever one or more of these variables change, the quantity of the good chosen by the consumer is likely to change as well. Here we shall change one of these variables at a time and study how the amount of the good chosen by the consumer is related to that variable. 2.4.1 Demand Curve and the Law of If the prices of other goods, the consumer s income and her tastes and preferences remain unchanged, the amount of a good that the consumer optimally chooses, becomes entirely dependent on its price. The relation between the consumer s optimal choice of the quantity of a good and its price is very important and this relation is called the demand function. Thus, the consumer s demand function for a good Consider any two variables x and y. A function y = f (x) is a relation between the two variables x and y such that for each value of x, there is an unique value of the variable y. In other words, f (x) is a rule which assigns an unique value y for each value of x. As the value of y depends on the value of x, y is called the dependent variable and x is called the independent variable. Consider, for example, a situation where x can take the values 0, 1, 2, 3 and suppose corresponding values of y are 10, 15, 18 and 20, respectively. Here y and x are related by the function y = f (x) which is defined as follows: f (0) = 10; f (1) = 15; f (2) = 18 and f (3) = 20. Consider another situation where x can take the values 0, 5, 10 and 20. And suppose corresponding values of y are 100, 90, 70 and 40, respectively. Demand Curve. The demand curve is a relation between the quantity of the good chosen by a consumer and the price of the good. The independent variable (price) is measured along the vertical axis and dependent variable (quantity) is measured along the horizontal axis. The demand curve gives the quantity demanded by the consumer at each price. Here, y and x are related by the function y = f (x) which is defined as follows: f (0) = 100; f (10) = 90; f (15) = 70 and f (20) = 40. Very often a functional relation between the two variables can be expressed in algebraic form like y = 5 + x and y = 50   x A function y = f (x) is an increasing function if the value of y does not decrease with increase in the value of x. It is a decreasing function if the value of y does not increase with increase in the value of x. The function in Example 1 is an increasing function. So is the function y = x + 5. The function in Example 2 is a decreasing function. The function y = 50   x is also Graphical Representation of a Function A graph of a function y = f (x) is a diagrammatic representation of the function. Following are the graphs of the functions in the examples Usually, in a graph, the independent variable is measured along the horizontal axis and the dependent variable is measured along the vertical axis. However, in economics, often the opposite is done. The demand curve, for example, is drawn by taking the independent variable (price) along the vertical axis and the dependent variable (quantity) along the horizontal axis. The graph of an increasing function is upward sloping or and the graph of a decreasing function is downward sloping. As we can see from the diagrams above, the graph of y = 5 + x is upward sloping and that of y = 50   x, is Theory of Consumer gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its price when the other things remain unchanged. The consumer s demand for a good as a function of its price can be written as X = f (P) where X denotes the quantity and P denotes the price of the good. The demand function can also be represented graphically as in Figure 2.13. The graphical representation of the demand function is called the demand curve. The relation between the consumer s demand for a good and the price of the good is likely to be negative in general. In other words, the amount of a good that a consumer would optimally choose is likely to increase when the price of the good falls and it is likely to decrease with a rise in the price of the good. 2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference Curves and Budget Consider an individual consuming bananas (X1)and mangoes (X2), whose income is M and market prices of X1 and X2 are P ' respectively. Figure (a) depicts her consumption equilibrium at point C, where she buys X ' and X ' quantities of bananas and mangoes respectively. In panel (b) of figure 2.14, we plot X '  which is the first point on the demand curve for X1. Suppose the price of X1 drops to and M remaining constant. The budget set in panel (a), expands and new consumption equilibrium is on a higher indifference curve at point D, where she buys more of bananas ( X ' ). Thus, demand for bananas increases as its price drops. We plot in panel (b) of figure 2.14 to get the second point on the demand curve for X1. Likewise the price of bananas can be dropped further to P, resulting in further increase in consumption of bananas to P  plotted against X  gives us the third point on the demand curve. Therefore, we observe that a drop in price of bananas results in an increase in quality of bananas purchased by an individual who maximises his utility. The demand curve for bananas is thus negatively The negative slope of the demand curve can also be explained in terms of the two effects namely, substitution effect and income effect that come into play when price of a commodity changes. When bananas become cheaper, the consumer maximises his utility by substituting bananas for mangoes in order to derive the same level of satisfaction of a price change, resulting in an increase in demand for bananas. Deriving a demand curve from indifference curves and budget constraints Moreover, as price of bananas drops, consumer s purchasing power increases, which further increases demand for bananas (and mangoes). This is the income effect of a price change, resulting in further increase in demand for bananas. Law of Demand: Law of Demand states that other things being equal, there is a negative relation between demand for a commodity and its price. In other words, when price of the commodity increases, demand for it falls and when price of the commodity decreases, demand for it rises, other factors remaining the same. A linear demand curve can be written d(p) = a   bp; 0   p  a = 0; p > a where a is the vertical intercept,  b is the slope of the demand curve. At price 0, the demand is a, and at price equal to a b, the demand is 0. The slope of the demand curve measures the rate at which demand changes with respect to its price. For a unit increase in the price of the good, the demand falls by b units. Figure 2.15 depicts a linear 2.4.3 Normal and Inferior Goods The demand function is a relation between the consumer s demand for a good and its price when other things are given. Instead of studying the relation between the demand for a good and its price, we can also study the relation between the consumer s demand for the good and the income of the consumer. The quantity of a good that the consumer demands can increase or decrease with the rise in income depending on the nature of the good. For most goods, the quantity that a consumer chooses, increases as the consumer s income increases and decreases as the consumer s income decreases. Such goods are called normal goods. Thus, a consumer s demand for a normal good moves in the same direction as the income of the consumer. However, there are some goods the demands for which move in the opposite direction of the income of the consumer. Such goods are called inferior goods. As the income of the consumer increases, the demand for an inferior good falls, and as the income decreases, the demand for an inferior Linear Demand Curve. The diagram depicts the linear demand curve given by equation 2.13. A rise in the purchasing power (income) of the consumer can sometimes induce the consumer to reduce the consumption of a good. In such a case, the substitution effect and the income effect will work in opposite directions. The demand for such a good can be inversely or positively related to its price depending on the relative strengths of these two opposing effects. If the substitution effect is stronger than the income effect, the demand for the good and the price of the good would still be inversely related. However, if the income effect is stronger than the substitution effect, the demand for the good would be positively related to its price. Such a good is called a Giffen good. Theory of Consumer good rises. Examples of inferior goods include low quality food items like A good can be a normal good for the consumer at some levels of income and an inferior good for her at other levels of income. At very low levels of income, a consumer s demand for low quality cereals can increase with income. But, beyond a level, any increase in income of the consumer is likely to reduce her consumption of such food items as she switches to better quality cereals. 2.4.4 Substitutes and Complements We can also study the relation between the quantity of a good that a consumer chooses and the price of a related good. The quantity of a good that the consumer chooses can increase or decrease with the rise in the price of a related good depending on whether the two goods are substitutes or complementary to each other. Goods which are consumed together are called complementary goods. Examples of goods which are complement to each other include tea and sugar, shoes and socks, pen and ink, etc. Since tea and sugar are used together, an increase in the price of sugar is likely to decrease the demand for tea and a decrease in the price of sugar is likely to increase the demand for tea. Similar is the case with other complements. In general, the demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of the price of its complementary goods. In contrast to complements, goods like tea and coffee are not consumed together. In fact, they are substitutes for each other. Since tea is a substitute for coffee, if the price of coffee increases, the consumers can shift to tea, and hence, the consumption of tea is likely to go up. On the other hand, if the price of coffee decreases, the consumption of tea is likely to go down. The demand for a good usually moves in the direction of the price of its substitutes. 2.4.5 Shifts in the Demand Curve The demand curve was drawn under the assumption that the consumer s income, the prices of other goods and the preferences of the consumer are given. What happens to the demand curve when any of these things changes? Given the prices of other goods and the preferences of a consumer, if the income increases, the demand for the good at each price changes, and hence, there is a shift in the demand curve. For normal goods, the demand curve shifts rightward and for inferior goods, the demand curve shifts leftward. Given the consumer s income and her preferences, if the price of a related good changes, the demand for a good at each level of its price changes, and hence, there is a shift in the demand curve. If there is an increase in the price of a substitute good, the demand curve shifts rightward. On the other hand, if there is an increase in the price of a complementary good, the demand curve The demand curve can also shift due to a change in the tastes and preferences of the consumer. If the consumer s preferences change in favour of a good, the demand curve for such a good shifts rightward. On the other hand, the demand curve shifts leftward due to an unfavourable change in the preferences of the consumer. The demand curve for ice-creams, for example, is likely to shift rightward in the summer because of preference for ice-creams goes up in summer. Revelation of the fact that cold-drinks might be injurious to health can adversely affect preferences for cold-drinks. This is likely to result in a leftward shift in the demand curve for cold-drinks. 2.5 MARKET DEMAND In the last section, we studied the choice problem of the individual consumer and derived the demand curve of the consumer. However, in the market for a Shifts in the demand curve are depicted in Figure 2.16. It may be mentioned that shift in demand curve takes place when there is a change in some factor, other than the price of the commodity. 2.4.6 Movements along the Demand Curve and Shifts in the As it has been noted earlier, the amount of a good that the consumer chooses depends on the price of the good, the prices of other goods, income of the consumer and her tastes and preferences. The demand function is a relation between the amount of the good and its price when other things remain unchanged. The demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand function. At higher prices, the demand is less, and at lower prices, the demand is more. Thus, any change in the price leads to movements along the demand curve. On the other hand, changes in any of the other things lead to a shift in the demand curve. Figure 2.17 illustrates a movement along the demand curve and a shift in the demand curve. Shifts in Demand. The demand curve in panel (a) shifts leftward and that in panel (b) shifts rightward. Movement along a Demand Curve and Shift of a Demand Curve. Panel (a) depicts a movement along the demand curve and panel (b) depicts a shift of the demand curve. Theory of Consumer good, there are many consumers. It is important to find out the market demand for the good. The market demand for a good at a particular price is the total demand of all consumers taken together. The market demand for a good can be derived from the individual demand curves. Suppose there are only two consumers in the market for a good. Suppose at price p, the demand of consumer 1 is q  1 and that of consumer 2 is q  2. Then, the market demand of the good at p  1 + q  2. Similarly, at price   p, if the demand of consumer 1 is q  and that of consumer 2 is q, the market demand of the good at. Thus, the market demand for the good at each price can be derived by adding up the demands of the two consumers at that price. If there are more than two consumers in the market for a good, the market demand can be derived similarly. The market demand curve of a good can also be derived from the individual demand curves graphically by adding up the individual demand curves horizontally as shown in Figure 2.18. This method of adding two curves is called Adding up Two Linear Demand Curves Consider, for example, a market where there are two consumers and the demand curves of the two consumers are given as d1(p) = 10   p and d2(p) = 15   p Furthermore, at any price greater than 10, the consumer 1 demands 0 unit of the good, and similarly, at any price greater than 15, the consumer 2 demands 0 unit of the good. The market demand can be derived by adding equations (2.14) and (2.15). At any price less than or equal to 10, the market demand is given by 25   2p, for any price greater than 10, and less than or equal to 15, market demand is 15   p, and at any price greater than 15, the market demand is 0. 2.6 ELASTICITY OF DEMAND The demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of its price. But the impact of the price change is always not the same. Sometimes, the demand for a good changes considerably even for small price changes. On the other hand, there are some goods for which the demand is not affected much by price changes. Derivation of the Market Demand Curve. The market demand curve can be derived as a horizontal summation of the individual demand curves. Demands for some goods are very responsive to price changes while demands for certain others are not so responsive to price changes. Price elasticity of demand is a measure of the responsiveness of the demand for a good to changes in its price. Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price. Price- elasticity of demand for a good percentage change in demand for the good percentage change in the price of the good is the change in price of the good and Q is the change in quantity of the good. Suppose an individual buy 15 bananas when its price is Rs. 5 per banana. when the price increases to Rs. 7 per banana, she reduces his demand to 12 bananas. In order to find her elasticity demand for bananas, we find the percentage change in quantity demanded and its price, using the information summarized in table. Note that the price elasticity of demand is a negative number since the demand for a good is negatively related to the price of a good. However, for simplicity, we will always refer to the absolute value of the elasticity. Percentage change in quantity demanded = Percentage change in Market price = Price Per banana (Rs.): P     Quantity of bananas demanded: Q Old Price: P1 = 5 Old quantity: Q1 = 15 New Price: P2 = 7 New quantity: Q2 = 12 Theory of Consumer Therefore, in our example, as price of bananas increases by 40 percent, demand for bananas drops by 20 percent. Price elasticity of demand Clearly, the demand for bananas is not very responsive to a change in price of bananas. When the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the percentage change in market price, e  is estimated to be less than one and the demand for the good is said to be inelastic at that price. Demand for essential goods is often found to be inelastic. When the percentage change in quantity demanded is more than the percentage change in market price, the demand is said to be highly responsive to changes in market price and the estimated e  is more than one. The demand for the good is said to be elastic at that price. Demand for luxury goods is seen to be highly responsive to changes in their market prices and When the percentage change in quantity demanded equals the percentage change in its market price, e  is estimated to be equal to one and the demand for the good is said to be Unitary-elastic at that price. Note that the demand for certain goods may be elastic, unitary elastic and inelastic at different prices. In fact, in the next section, elasticity along a linear demand curve is estimated at different prices and shown to vary at each point on a downward sloping demand 2.6.1 Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve Let us consider a linear demand curve q = a   bp. Note that at any point on the demand curve, the change in demand per unit change in the price Substituting the value of we obtain, eD =   b puting the value of q, eD =   bp                        (2.17) From (2.17), it is clear that the elasticity of demand is different at different points on a linear demand curve. At p = 0, the elasticity is 0, at q = 0, elasticity is. At p = 2 b, the elasticity is 1, at any price greater than 0 and less b, elasticity is less than 1, and at any price greater than 2 b, elasticity is greater than 1. The price elasticities of demand along the linear demand curve given by equation (2.17) are depicted in Figure 2.19. Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve. Price elasticity of demand is different at different points on the linear demand Constant Elasticity Demand Curve The elasticity of demand on different points on a linear demand curve is different varying from 0 to. But sometimes, the demand curves can be such that the elasticity of demand remains constant throughout. Consider, for example, a vertical demand curve as the one depicted in Figure 2.20(a). Whatever be the price, the demand is given at the level q. A price never leads to a change in the demand for such a demand curve and |eD| is always 0. Therefore, a vertical demand curve is perfectly inelastic. Figure 2.20 (b) depics a horizontal demand curve, where market price remains constant at P, whatever be the level of demand for the commodity. At any other price, quantity demanded drops to zero and therefore =. A horizontal demand curve is perfectly elastic. Geometric Measure of Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve The elasticity of a linear demand curve can easily be measured geometrically. The elasticity of demand at any point on a straight line demand curve is given by the ratio of the lower segment and the upper segment of the demand curve at that point. To see why this is the case, consider the following figure which depicts a straight line demand curve, q = a   bp. Suppose at price p0, the demand for the good is q0. Now consider a small change in the price. The new price is p1, and at that price, demand for the good is q1.  q = q1q0 = CD and  p = p1p0 = CE. Therefore, eD = Since ECD and Bp0D are similar triangles, CD p B. But Since, Bp0D and BOA are similar triangles, p B  = DA Thus, eD = DA The elasticity of demand at different points on a straight line demand curve can be derived by this method. Elasticity is 0 at the point where the demand curve meets the horizontal axis and it is   at the point where the demand curve meets the vertical axis. At the midpoint of the demand curve, the elasticity is 1, at any point to the left of the midpoint, it is greater than 1 and at any point to the right, it is less than 1. Note that along the horizontal axis p = 0, along the vertical axis q = 0 and at the midpoint of the demand curve p = 2 Theory of Consumer Figure 2.20(c) depicts a demand curve which has the shape of a rectangular hyperbola. This demand curve has a property that a percentage change in price along the demand curve always leads to equal percentage change in quantity. Therefore, |eD| = 1 at every point on this demand curve. This demand curve is called the unitary elastic demand curve. 2.6.2 Factors Determining Price Elasticity of Demand for a Good The price elasticity of demand for a good depends on the nature of the good and the availability of close substitutes of the good. Consider, for example, necessities like food. Such goods are essential for life and the demands for such goods do not change much in response to changes in their prices. Demand for food does not change much even if food prices go up. On the other hand, demand for luxuries can be very responsive to price changes. In general, demand for a necessity is likely to be price inelastic while demand for a luxury good is likely to be price elastic. Though demand for food is inelastic, the demands for specific food items are likely to be more elastic. For example, think of a particular variety of pulses. If the price of this variety of pulses goes up, people can shift to some other variety of pulses which is a close substitute. The demand for a good is likely to be elastic if close substitutes are easily available. On the other hand, if close substitutes are not available easily, the demand for a good is likely to be inelastic. 2.6.3 Elasticity and Expenditure The expenditure on a good is equal to the demand for the good times its price. Often it is important to know how the expenditure on a good changes as a result of a price change. The price of a good and the demand for the good are inversely related to each other. Whether the expenditure on the good goes up or down as a result of an increase in its price depends on how responsive the demand for the good is to the price change. Consider an increase in the price of a good. If the percentage decline in quantity is greater than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on the good will go down. For example, see row 2 in table 2.5 which shows that as price of a commodity increases by 10%, its demand drops by 12%, resulting in a decline in expenditure on the good. On the other hand, if the percentage decline in quantity is less than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on Constant Elasticity Demand Curves. Elasticity of demand at all points along the vertical demand curve, as shown in panel (a), is 0. Elasticity of demand at all point along the horizontal demand curve, as shown in panel (b) is. Elasticity at all points on the demand curve in panel (c) is 1. the good will go up (See row 1 in table 2.5). And if the percentage decline in quantity is equal to the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on the good will remain unchanged (see row 3 in table 2.5). Now consider a decline in the price of the good. If the percentage increase in quantity is greater than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on the good will go up(see row 4 in table 2.5). On the other hand, if the percentage increase in quantity is less than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on the good will go down(see row 5 in table 2.5). And if the percentage increase in quantity is equal to the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on the good will remain unchanged (see row 6 in table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would change in the opposite direction as the price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is greater than the percentage change in price, ie if the good is price-elastic (see rows 2 and 4 in table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would change in the same direction as the price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is less than the percentage change in price, i.e., if the good is price inelastic (see rows 1 and 5 in table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would remain unchanged if and only if the percentage change in quantity is equal to the percentage change in price, i.e., if the good is unit-elastic (see rows 3 and 6 in table 2.5). Change   Change in     % Change   % Change       Impact on     Nature of price in Price   Quantity      in price     in quantity Expenditure     Elasticity of (P)      demand (Q)   demand                              = P Q           demand 1                                        +10              -8                               Price Inelastic 2                                        +10            -12                                Price Elastic 3                                        +10            -10           No Change      Unit Elastic 4                                        -10             +15                               Price Elastic 5                                               -10                 +7                                  Price Inelastic 6                                         -10             +10         No Change     Unit Elastic Table 2.5: For hypothetic cases of price rise and drop, the following table summarises the relationship between elasticity and change in expenditure of a commodity An equation of the form xy = c where x and y are two variables and c is a constant, giving us a curve called rectangular hyperbola. It is a downward sloping curve in the x-y plane as shown in the diagram. For any two points p and q on the curve, the areas of the two rectangles Oy1px1 and Oy2qx2 are same and equal to c. If the equation of a demand curve takes the form pq = e, where e is a constant, it will be a rectangular hyperbola, where price (p) times quantity (q) is a constant. With such a demand curve, no matter at what point the consumer consumes, her expenditures are always the same and equal to e. Theory of Consumer Relationship between Elasticity and change in Expenditure on a Good Suppose at price p, the demand for a good is q, and at price p +  p, the demand for the good is q +  q. At price p, the total expenditure on the good is pq, and at price p +  p, the total expenditure on the good is (p +  p)(q +  q). If price changes from p to (p +  p), the change in the expenditure on the good is, (p +  p)(q +  q)   pq = q p + p q +  p q. For small values of  p and  q, the value of the term  p q is negligible, and in that case, the change in the expenditure on the good is approximately given by q p + p q. Approximate change in expenditure =  E = q p + p q =  p(q + p q =  p[q(1 + )] =  p[q(1 + eD)]. if eD <  1, then q (1 + eD) < 0, and hence,  E has the opposite sign as  p, if eD >  1, then q (1 + eD) > 0, and hence,  E has the same sign as  p, if eD =  1, then q (1 + eD) = 0, and hence,  E = 0. The budget set is the collection of all bundles of goods that a consumer can buy with her income at the prevailing market prices. The budget line represents all bundles which cost the consumer her entire income. The budget line is negatively sloping. The budget set changes if either of the two prices or the income changes. The consumer has well-defined preferences over the collection of all possible bundles. She can rank the available bundles according to her preferences The consumer s preferences are assumed to be monotonic. An indifference curve is a locus of all points representing bundles among which the consumer is indifferent. Monotonicity of preferences implies that the indifference curve is downward A consumer s preferences, in general, can be represented by an indifference map. A consumer s preferences, in general, can also be represented by a utility function. A rational consumer always chooses her most preferred bundle from the budget set. The consumer s optimum bundle is located at the point of tangency between the budget line and an indifference curve. The consumer s demand curve gives the amount of the good that a consumer chooses at different levels of its price when the price of other goods, the consumer s income and her tastes and preferences remain unchanged. The demand curve is generally downward sloping. The demand for a normal good increases (decreases) with increase (decrease) in the consumer s income. The demand for an inferior good decreases (increases) as the income of the consumer increases (decreases). The market demand curve represents the demand of all consumers in the market Marginal Rate of substitution Diminishing rate of substitution Indifference map,Utility function Law of demand Price elasticity of demand 1. What do you mean by the budget set of a consumer? 2. What is budget line? 3. Explain why the budget line is downward sloping. 4. A consumer wants to consume two goods. The prices of the two goods are Rs 4 and Rs 5 respectively. The consumer s income is Rs 20. (i) Write down the equation of the budget line. (ii) How much of good 1 can the consumer consume if she spends her entire income on that good? (iii) How much of good 2 can she consume if she spends her entire income on (iv) What is the slope of the budget line? Questions 5, 6 and 7 are related to question 4. 5. How does the budget line change if the consumer s income increases to Rs 40 but the prices remain unchanged? 6. How does the budget line change if the price of good 2 decreases by a rupee but the price of good 1 and the consumer s income remain unchanged? 7. What happens to the budget set if both the prices as well as the income double? 8. Suppose a consumer can afford to buy 6 units of good 1 and 8 units of good 2 if she spends her entire income. The prices of the two goods are Rs 6 and Rs 8 respectively. How much is the consumer s income? 9. Suppose a consumer wants to consume two goods which are available only in integer units. The two goods are equally priced at Rs 10 and the consumer s income is Rs 40. (i) Write down all the bundles that are available to the consumer. (ii) Among the bundles that are available to the consumer, identify those which cost her exactly Rs 40. 10. What do you mean by  monotonic preferences ? 11. If a consumer has monotonic preferences, can she be indifferent between the bundles (10, 8) and (8, 6)? 12. Suppose a consumer s preferences are monotonic. What can you say about her preference ranking over the bundles (10, 10), (10, 9) and (9, 9)? taken together at different levels of the price of the good. The price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price. The elasticity of demand is a pure number. Elasticity of demand for a good and total expenditure on the good are closely Theory of Consumer 13. Suppose your friend is indifferent to the bundles (5, 6) and (6, 6). Are the preferences of your friend monotonic? 14. Suppose there are two consumers in the market for a good and their demand functions are as follows: d1(p) = 20   p for any price less than or equal to 20, and d1(p) = 0 at any price greater than 20. d2(p) = 30   2p for any price less than or equal to 15 and d1(p) = 0 at any price greater than 15. Find out the market demand function. 15. Suppose there are 20 consumers for a good and they have identical demand d(p) = 10   3p for any price less than or equal to 10 3  and d1(p) = 0 at any price greater than 10 What is the market demand function? 16. Consider a market where there are just two consumers and suppose their demands for the good are given as follows: Calculate the market demand for the good. 17. What do you mean by a normal good? 18. What do you mean by an  inferior good ? Give some examples. 19. What do you mean by substitutes? Give examples of two goods which are substitutes of each other. 20. What do you mean by complements? Give examples of two goods which are complements of each other. 21. Explain price elasticity of demand. 22. Consider the demand for a good. At price Rs 4, the demand for the good is 25 units. Suppose price of the good increases to Rs 5, and as a result, the demand for the good falls to 20 units. Calculate the price elasticity. 23. Consider the demand curve D (p) = 10   3p. What is the elasticity at price 5 24. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is   0.2. If there is a 5 % increase in the price of the good, by what percentage will the demand for the good go down? 25. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is   0.2. How will the expenditure on the good be affected if there is a 10 % increase in the price of 27. Suppose there was a 4 % decrease in the price of a good, and as a result, the expenditure on the good increased by 2 %. What can you say about the elasticity Production and Costs roduction and Costs roduction and Costs roduction and Costs roduction and Costs A Firm Effort In the previous chapter, we have discussed the behaviour of the consumers. In this chapter as well as in the next, we shall examine the behaviour of a producer. Production is the process by which inputs are transformed into  output. Production is carried out by producers or firms. A firm acquires different inputs like labour, machines, land, raw materials etc. It uses these inputs to produce output. This output can be consumed by consumers, or used by other firms for further production. For example, a tailor uses a sewing machine, cloth, thread and his own labour to  produce  shirts. A farmer uses his land, labour, a tractor, seed, fertilizer, water etc to produce wheat. A car manufacturer uses land for a factory, machinery, labour, and various other inputs (steel, aluminium, rubber etc) to produce cars. A rickshaw puller uses a rickshaw and his own labour to  produce  rickshaw rides. A domestic helper uses her labour to produce  cleaning services. We make certain simplifying assumptions to start with. Production is instantaneous: in our very simple model of production no time elapses between the combination of the inputs and the production of the output. We also tend to use the terms production and supply synonymously and often In order to acquire inputs a firm has to pay for them. This is called the cost of production. Once output has been produced, the firm sell it in the market and earns revenue. The difference between the revenue and cost is called the firm s profit. We assume that the objective of a firm is to earn the maximum profit that it can. In this chapter, we discuss the relationship between inputs and output. Then we look at the cost structure of the firm. We do this to be able to identifiy the output at which firms profits are maximum. 3.1  PRODUCTION FUNCTION The production function of a firm is a relationship between inputs used and output produced by the firm. For various quantities of inputs used, it gives the maximum quantity of output that can be Consider the farmer we mentioned above. For simplicity, we assume that the farmer uses only two inputs to produce wheat: land and labour. A production function tells us the maximum amount of wheat he can produce for a given amount of land that he uses, and a given number of hours of labour that he performs. Suppose that he uses 2 hours of labour/ day and 1 hectare of land to produce a maximum of 2 tonnes of wheat. Then, a function that describes this relation is called a production function. One possible example of the form this could take is: q = K   L, Where, q is the amount of wheat produced, K is the area of land in hectares, L is the number of hours of work done in a day. Describing a production function in this manner tells us the exact relation between inputs and output. If either K or L increase, q will also increase. For any L and any K, there will be only one q. Since by definition we are taking the maximum output for any level of inputs, a production function deals only with the efficient use of inputs. Efficiency implies that it is not possible to get any more output from the same level of inputs. A production function is defined for a given technology. It is the technological knowledge that determines the maximum levels of output that can be produced using different combinations of inputs. If the technology improves, the maximum levels of output obtainable for different input combinations increase. We then have a new production function. The inputs that a firm uses in the production process are called factors of production. In order to produce output, a firm may require any number of different inputs. However, for the time being, here we consider a firm that produces output using only two factors of production   labour and capital. Our production function, therefore, tells us the maximum quantity of output (q) that can be produced by using different combinations of these two factors of productions- Labour (L) and Capital (K). We may write the production function as q = f(L,K) where, L is labour and K is capital and q is the maximum output that can be A numerical example of production function is given in Table 3.1. The left column shows the amount of labour and the top row shows the amount of capital. As we move to the right along any row, capital increases and as we move down along any column, labour increases. For different values of the two factors, Production and Costs Table 3.1: Production Function the table shows the corresponding output levels. For example, with 1 unit of labour and 1 unit of capital, the firm can produce at most 1 unit of output; with 2 units of labour and 2 units of capital, it can produce at most 10 units of output; with 3 units of labour and 2 units of capital, it can produce at most 18 units of output and so on. In our example, both the inputs are necessary for the production. If any of the inputs becomes zero, there will be no production. With both inputs positive, output will be positive. As we increase the amount of any input, output increases. 3.2 THE SHORT RUN AND THE LONG RUN Before we begin with any further analysis, it is important to discuss two concepts  the short run and the long run. In the short run, at least one of the factor   labour or capital   cannot be varied, and therefore, remains fixed. In order to vary the output level, the firm can vary only the other factor. The factor that remains fixed is called the fixed factor whereas the other factor which the firm can vary is called the variable Consider the example represented through Table 3.1. Suppose, in the short run, capital remains fixed at 4 units. Then the corresponding column shows the different levels of output that the firm may produce using different quantities of labour in the short run. In Chapter 2, we have learnt about indifference curves. Here, we introduce a similar concept known as isoquant. It is just an alternative way of representing the production function. Consider a production function with two inputs labour and capital. An isoquant is the set of all possible combinations of the two inputs that yield the same maximum possible level of output. Each isoquant represents a particular level of output and is labelled with that amount of output. Let us return to table 3.1 notice that the output of 10 units can be produced in 3 ways (4L, 1K), (2L, 2K), (1L, 4K). All these combination of L, K lie on the same isoquant, which represents the level of output 10. Can you identify the sets of inputs that will lie on the isoquant q = 50? The diagram here generalizes this concept. We place L on the X axis and K on the Y axis. We have three isoquants for the three output levels, namely q = q1, q = q2 and q = q3. Two input combinations (L1, K2) and (L2, K1) give us the same level of output q1. If we fix capital at K1 and increase labour to L3, output increases and we reach a higher isoquant, q = q2. When marginal products are positive, with greater amount of one input, the same level of output can be produced only using lesser amount of the other. Therefore, isoquants are negatively sloped. Production and Costs In the long run, all factors of production can be varied. A firm in order to produce different levels of output in the long run may vary both the inputs simultaneously. So, in the long run, there is no fixed factor. For any particular production process, long run generally refers to a longer time period than the short run. For different production processes, the long run periods may be different. It is not advisable to define short run and long run in terms of say, days, months or years. We define a period as long run or short run simply by looking at whether all the inputs can be varied or not. 3.3 TOTAL PRODUCT, AVERAGE PRODUCT AND MARGINAL PRODUCT 3.3.1 Total Product Suppose we vary a single input and keep all other inputs constant. Then for different levels of that input, we get different levels of output. This relationship between the variable input and output, keeping all other inputs constant, is often referred to as Total Product (TP) of the variable input. Let us again look at Table 3.1. Suppose capital is fixed at 4 units. Now in the Table 3.1, we look at the column where capital takes the value 4. As we move down along the column, we get the output values for different values of labour. This is the total product of labour schedule with K2 = 4. This is also sometimes called total return to or total physical product of the variable input. This is shown again in the second column of table in 3.2 Once we have defined total product, it will be useful to define the concepts of average product (AP) and marginal product (MP). They are useful in order to describe the contribution of the variable input to the production process. 3.3.2 Average Product Average product is defined as the output per unit of variable input. We calculate The last column of table 3.2 gives us a numerical example of average product of labour (with capital fixed at 4) for the production function described in table 3.1. Values in this column are obtained by dividing TP (column 2) by L (Column 1). 3.3.3 Marginal Product Marginal product of an input is defined as the change in output per unit of change in the input when all other inputs are held constant. When capital is held constant, the marginal product of labour is where   represents the change of the variable. The third column of table 3.2 gives us a numerical example of Marginal Product of labour (with capital fixed at 4) for the production function described in table 3.1. Values in this column are obtained by dividing change in TP by Average product of an input at any level of employment is the average of all marginal products up to that level. Average and marginal products are often referred to as average and marginal returns, respectively, to the variable input. 3.4 THE LAW OF DIMINISHING MARGINAL PRODUCT AND THE LAW OF VARIABLE PROPORTIONS If we plot the data in table 3.2 on graph paper, placing labour on the X-axis and output on the Y-axis, we get the curves shown in the diagram below. Let us examine what is happening to TP. Notice that TP increases as labour input increases. But the rate at which it increases is not constant. An increase in labour from 1 to 2 increases TP by 10 units. An increase in labour from 2 to 3 increases TP by 12. The rate at which TP increases, as explained above, is shown by the MP. Notice that the MP first increases (upto 3 units of labour) and then begins to change in L. For example, when L changes from 1 to 2, TP changes from 10 to MPL= (TP at L units)   (TP at L   1 unit) Here, Change in TP = 24 -10 = 14 Change in L = 1 Marginal product of the 2nd unit of labour = 14/1 = 14 Since inputs cannot take negative values, marginal product is undefined at zero level of input employment. For any level of an input, the sum of marginal products of every preceeding unit of that input gives the total product. So total product is the sum of marginal products. Table 3.2: Total Product, Marginal product and Average product Production and Costs fall. This tendency of the MP to first increase and then fall is called the law of variable proportions or the law of diminishing marginal product. Law of variable proportions say that the marginal product of a factor input initially rises with its employment level. But after reaching a certain level of employment, it starts falling. Why does this happen? In order to understand this, we first define the concept of factor proportions. Factor proportions represent the ratio in which the two inputs are combined to produce output. As we hold one factor fixed and keep increasing the other, the factor proportions change. Initially, as we increase the amount of the variable input, the factor proportions become more and more suitable for the production and marginal product increases. But after a certain level of employment, the production process becomes too crowded with the variable input. Suppose table 3.2 describes the output of a farmer who has 4 hectares of land, and can choose how much labour he wants to use. If he uses only 1 worker, he has too much land for the worker to cultivate alone. As he increases the number of workers, the amount of labour per unit land increases, and each worker adds proportionally more and more to the total output. Marginal product increases in this phase. When the fourth worker is hired, the land begins to get  crowded. Each worker now has insufficient land to work efficiently. So the output added by each additional worker is now proportionally less. The marginal product begins to fall. We can use these observations to describe the general shapes of the TP, MP and AP curves as below. 3.5 SHAPES OF TOTAL PRODUCT, MARGINAL PRODUCT AND AVERAGE PRODUCT CURVES An increase in the amount of one of the inputs keeping all other inputs constant results in an increase in output. Table 3.2 shows how the total product changes as the amount of labour increases. The total product curve in the input-output plane is a positively sloped curve. Figure 3.1 shows the shape of the total product curve for a typical firm. We measure units of labour along the horizontal axis and output along the vertical axis. With L units of labour, the firm can at most produce q1 units of According to the law of marginal product of an input initially rises and then after a certain level of employment, it starts falling. The MP curve therefore, looks like an inverse  U -shaped curve as in figure 3.2. Let us now see what the AP curve looks like. For the first unit of the variable input, one can easily check that the MP and the Total Product. This is a total product curve for labour. When all other inputs are held constant, it shows the different output levels obtainable from different units of labour. AP are same. Now as we increase the amount of input, the MP rises. AP being the average of marginal products, also rises, but rises less than MP. Then, after a point, the MP starts falling. However, as long as the value of MP remains higher than the value of the  AP, the AP continues to rise. Once MP has fallen sufficiently, its value becomes less than the AP and the AP also starts falling. So AP curve is also As long as the AP increases, it must be the case that MP is greater than AP. Otherwise, AP cannot rise. Similarly, when AP falls, MP has to be less than AP. It, follows that MP curve cuts AP curve from above at its maximum. Figure 3.2 shows the shapes of AP and MP curves for a typical firm. The AP of factor 1 is maximum at L. To the left of L, AP is rising and MP is greater than AP. To the right of L, AP is falling and MP is less than AP. 3.6 RETURNS TO SCALE The law of variable proportions arises because factor proportions change as long as one factor is held constant and the other is increased. What if both factors can change? Remember that this can happen only in the long run. One special case in the long run occurs when both factors are increased by the same proportion, or factors are scaled up. When a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by the same proportion, the production function is said to display Constant returns to scale (CRS). When a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by a larger proportion, the production function is said to display Increasing Returns to Scale (IRS) Decreasing Returns to Scale (DRS) holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by a smaller proportion. For example, suppose in a production process, all inputs get doubled. As a result, if the output gets doubled, the production function exhibits CRS. If output is less than doubled, then DRS holds, and if it is more than doubled, then IRS holds. Returns to Scale Consider a production function q = f (x1, x2) where the firm produces q amount of output using x1 amount of factor 1 and x2 amount of factor 2. Now suppose the firm decides to increase the employment level of both the factors t (t > 1) times. Mathematically, we Average and Marginal Product. These are average and marginal product curves of labour. Production and Costs 3.7.1 Short Run Costs We have previously discussed the short run and the long run. In the short run, some of the factors of production cannot be varied, and therefore, remain fixed. The cost that a firm incurs to employ these fixed inputs is called the total fixed cost (TFC). Whatever amount of output the firm In order to produce output, the firm needs to employ inputs. But a given level of output, typically, can be produced in many ways. There can be more than one input combinations with which a firm can produce a desired level of output. In Table 3.1, we can see that 50 units of output can be produced by three different input combinations (L = 6, K = 3), (L = 4, K = 4) and (L = 3, K = 6). The question is which input combination will the firm choose? With the input prices given, it will choose that combination of inputs which is least expensive. So, for every level of output, the firm chooses the least cost input combination. Thus the cost function describes the least cost of producing each level of output given prices of factors of production and technology. can say that the production function exhibits constant returns to scale if f (tx1, tx2) = t.f (x1, x2) ie the new output level f (tx1, tx2) is exactly t times the previous output level f (x1, x2). Similarly, the production function exhibits increasing returns to scale if, f (tx1, tx2) > t.f (x1, x2). It exhibits decreasing returns to scale if, f (tx1, tx2) < t.f (x1, x2). Cobb-Douglas Production Function Consider a production function q = x1 where   and   are constants. The firm produces q amount of output using x1 amount of factor 1 and x2 amount of factor 2. This is called a Cobb-Douglas production function. Suppose with x1 = x  and x2 = x, we have q0 units of output, i.e. If we increase both the inputs t (t > 1) times, we get the new output q1 = (t x )  (t = t   +   When   +   = 1, we have q1 = tq0. That is, the output increases t times. So the production function exhibits CRS. Similarly, when   +   > 1, the production function exhibits IRS. When   +   < 1 the production function exhibits DRS. produces, this cost remains fixed for the firm. To produce any required level of output, the firm, in the short run, can adjust only variable inputs. Accordingly, the cost that a firm incurs to employ these variable inputs is called the total variable cost (TVC). Adding the fixed and the variable costs, we get the total cost (TC) of a firm TC = TVC + TFC In order to increase the production of output, the firm must employ more of the variable inputs. As a result, total variable cost and total cost will increase. Therefore, as output increases, total variable cost and total cost increase. In Table 3.3, we have an example of cost function of a typical firm. The first column shows different levels of output. For all levels of output, the total fixed cost is Rs 20. Total variable cost increases as output increases. With output zero, TVC is zero. For 1 unit of output, TVC is Rs 10; for 2 units of output, TVC is Rs 18 and so on. In the fourth column, we obtain the total cost (TC) as the sum of the corresponding values in second column (TFC) and third column (TVC). At zero level of output, TC is just the fixed cost, and hence, equal to Rs 20. For 1 unit of output, total cost is Rs 30; for 2 units of output, the TC is Rs 38 and so on. The short run average cost (SAC) incurred by the firm is defined as the total cost per unit of output. We calculate it as SAC = TC In Table 3.3, we get the SAC-column by dividing the values of the fourth column by the corresponding values of the first column. At zero output, SAC is undefined. For the first unit, SAC is Rs 30; for 2 units of output, SAC is Rs 19 and so on. Similarly, the average variable cost (AVC) is defined as the total variable cost per unit of output. We calculate it as AVC = TVC Also, average fixed cost (AFC) is AFC = TFC SAC = AVC + AFC In Table 3.3, we get the AFC-column by dividing the values of the second column by the corresponding values of the first column. Similarly, we get the AVC-column by dividing the values of the third column by the corresponding values of the first column. At zero level of output, both AFC and AVC are undefined. For the first unit of output, AFC is Rs 20 and AVC is Rs 10. Adding them, we get the SAC equal to Rs 30. The short run marginal cost (SMC) is defined as the change in total cost per unit of change in output change in total change in output where   represents the change in the value of the variable. Production and Costs The last column in table 3.3 gives a numerical example for the calculation of SMC. Values in this column are obtained by dividing the change in TC by the change in output, at each level of output. Thus at q=5, Change in TC = (TC at q=5) - (TC at q=4) = (53)   (49) Change in q = 1 SMC = 4/1 = 4 Costs. These are total fixed cost (TFC), total variable cost (TVC) and total cost (TC) curves for a firm. Total cost is the vertical sum of total fixed cost and total variable cost. (units) (q) (Rs) Table 3.3: Various Concepts of Costs Just like the case of marginal product, marginal cost also is undefined at zero level of output. It is important to note here that in the short run, fixed cost cannot be changed. When we change the level of output, whatever change occurs to total cost is entirely due to the change in total variable cost. So in the short run, marginal cost is the increase in TVC due to increase in production of one extra unit of output. For any level of output, the sum of marginal costs up to that level gives us the total variable cost at that level. One may wish to check this from the example represented through Table 3.3. Average variable cost at some level of output is therefore, the average of all marginal costs up to that level. In Table 3.3, we see that when the output is zero, SMC is undefined. For the first unit of output, SMC is Rs 10; for the second unit, the SMC is Rs 8 and so Shapes of the Short Run Cost Now let us see what these short run cost curves look like. You could plot the data from in table 3.3 by placing output on the x-axis and costs on Previously, we have discussed that in order to increase the production of output the firm needs to employ more of the variable inputs. This results in an increase in total variable cost, and hence, an increase in total cost. Therefore, as output increases, total variable cost and total cost increase. Total fixed cost, however, is independent of the amount of output produced and remains constant for all levels of Figure 3.3 illustrates the shapes of total fixed cost, total variable cost and total cost curves for a typical firm. We place output on the x-axis and costs on the y-axis. TFC is a constant which takes the value c1 and does not change with the change in output. It is, therefore, a horizontal straight line cutting the cost axis at the point c1. At q1, TVC is c2 and TC is c3. AFC is the ratio of TFC to q. TFC is a constant. Therefore, as q increases, AFC decreases. When output is very close to zero, AFC is arbitrarily large, and as output moves towards infinity, AFC moves towards zero. AFC curve is, in fact, a rectangular hyperbola. If we multiply any value q of output with its corresponding AFC, we always get a constant, namely TFC. Figure 3.4 shows the shape of average fixed cost curve for a typical firm. We measure output along the horizontal axis and AFC along the vertical axis. At q1 level of output, we get the corresponding average fixed cost at F. The TFC can be calculated as TFC = AFC   quantity = OF   Oq1 = the area of the rectangle OFCq1 Average Fixed Cost. The average fixed cost curve is a rectangular hyperbola. The area of the rectangle OFCq1 gives us the total The Total Fixed Cost Curve. The slope of the angle  AOq0 gives us the average fixed cost at q0. We can also calculate AFC from TFC curve. In Figure 3.5, the horizontal straight line cutting the vertical axis at F is the TFC curve. At q0 level of output, total fixed cost is equal to OF. At q0, the corresponding point on the TFC curve is A. Let the angle  AOq0 be. The AFC at q0 is Oq  = tan  Production and Costs Let us now look at the SMC curve. Marginal cost is the additional cost that a firm incurs to produce one extra unit of output. According to the law of variable proportions, initially, the marginal product of a factor increases as employment increases, and then after a certain point, it decreases. This means initially to produce every extra unit of output, the requirement of the factor becomes less and less, and then after a certain point, it becomes greater and greater. As a result, with the factor price given, initially the SMC falls, and then after a certain point, it rises. SMC curve is, At zero level of output, SMC is undefined. The TVC at a particular level of output is given by the area under the SMC curve up to that level. Now, what does the AVC curve look like? For the first unit of output, it is easy to check that SMC and AVC are the same. So both SMC and AVC curves start from the same point. Then, as output increases, SMC falls. AVC being the average of marginal costs, also falls, but falls less than SMC. Then, after a point, SMC starts rising. AVC, however, continues to fall as long as the value of SMC remains less than the prevailing value of AVC. Once the SMC has risen sufficiently, its value becomes greater than the value of AVC. The AVC then starts rising. The AVC curve is therefore  U -shaped. As long as AVC is falling, SMC must be less than the AVC. As  AVC rises, SMC must be greater than the AVC. So the SMC curve cuts the AVC curve from below at the minimum point of AVC. The Average Variable Cost Curve. The area of the rectangle OVBq0 gives us the total variable cost at q0. The Total Variable Cost Curve. The slope of the angle  EOqo gives us the average variable cost at qo. In Figure 3.7, we measure output along the horizontal axis and TVC along the vertical axis. At q0 level of output, OV is the total variable cost. Let the angle  E0q0 be equal to. Then, at q0, the AVC can be calculated AV C = TVC Oq  = tan   In Figure 3.6 we measure output along the horizontal axis and AVC along the vertical axis. At q0 level of output, AVC is equal to OV. The total variable cost at q0 is TVC = AVC   quantity = OV   Oq0 = the area of the rectangle OV Bq0. Let us now look at SAC. SAC is the sum of AVC and AFC. Initially, both AVC and AFC decrease as output increases. Therefore, SAC initially falls. After a certain level of output production, AVC starts rising, but AFC continuous to fall. Initially the fall in AFC is greater than the rise in AVC and SAC is still falling. But, after a certain level of production, rise in AVC becomes larger than  the fall in AFC. From this point onwards, SAC is rising. SAC curve is therefore  U -shaped. It lies above the AVC curve with the vertical difference being equal to the value of AFC. The minimum point of SAC curve lies to the right of the minimum point of AVC curve. Similar to the case of AVC and SMC,  as long as SAC is falling, SMC is less than the SAC. When SAC is rising, SMC is greater than the SAC. SMC curve cuts the SAC curve from below at the minimum point of SAC. Figure 3.8 shows the shapes of short run marginal cost, average variable cost and short run average cost curves for a typical firm. AVC reaches its minimum at q1 units of output. To the left of q1, AVC is falling and SMC is less than AVC. To the right of q1, AVC is rising and SMC is greater than AVC. SMC curve cuts the AVC curve at  P   which is the minimum point of AVC curve. The minimum point of SAC curve is  S   which corresponds to the output q2. It is the intersection point between SMC and SAC curves. To the left of q2, SAC is falling and SMC is less than SAC. To the right of q2, SAC is rising and SMC is greater than SAC. 3.7.2 Long Run Costs In the long run, all inputs are variable. There are no fixed costs. The total cost and the total variable cost therefore, coincide in the long run. Long run average cost (LRAC) is defined as cost per unit of output, i.e. LRAC = TC Long run marginal cost (LRMC) is the change in total cost per unit of change in output. When output changes in discrete units, then, if we increase production from q1 1 to q1 units of output, the marginal cost of producing q1 th unit will be LRMC = (TC at q1 units)   (TC at q1   1 units) Short Run Costs. Short run marginal cost, average variable cost and average cost curves. Production and Costs Long Run Costs. Long run marginal cost and average cost curves. Just like the short run, in the long run, the sum of all marginal costs up to some output level gives us the total cost at that level. Shapes of the Long Run Cost Curves We have previously discussed the returns to scales. Now let us see their implications for the shape of LRAC. IRS implies that if we increase all the inputs by a certain proportion, output increases by more than that proportion. In other words, to increase output by a certain proportion, inputs need to be increased by less than that proportion. With the input prices given, cost also increases by a lesser proportion. For example, suppose we want to double the output. To do that, inputs need to be increased, but less than double. The cost that the firm incurs to hire those inputs therefore also need to be increased by less than double. What is happening to the average cost here? It must be the case that as long as IRS operates, average cost falls as the firm increases output. DRS implies that if we want to increase the output by a certain proportion, inputs need to be increased by more than that proportion. As a result, cost also increases by more than that proportion. So, as long as DRS operates, the average cost must be rising as the firm increases output. CRS implies a proportional increase in inputs resulting in a proportional increase in output. So the average cost remains constant as long as CRS operates. It is argued that in a typical firm IRS is observed at the initial level of production. This is then followed by the CRS and then by the DRS. Accordingly, the LRAC curve is a  U -shaped curve. Its downward sloping part corresponds to IRS and upward rising part corresponds to DRS. At the minimum point of the LRAC curve, CRS is observed. Let us check how the LRMC curve looks like. For the first unit of output, both LRMC and LRAC are the same. Then, as output increases, LRAC initially falls, and then, after a certain point, it rises. As long as average cost is falling, marginal cost must be less than the average cost. When the average cost is rising, marginal cost must be greater than the average cost. LRMC curve is therefore a  U -shaped curve. It cuts the LRAC curve from below at the minimum point of the LRAC. Figure 3.9 shows the shapes of the long run marginal cost and the long run average cost curves for a typical firm. LRAC reaches its minimum at q1. To the left of q1, LRAC is falling and LRMC is less than the LRAC curve. To the right of q1, LRAC is rising and LRMC is higher than LRAC. For different combinations of inputs, the production function shows the maximum quantity of output that can be produced. In the short run, some inputs cannot be varied. In the long run, all inputs can be Total product is the relationship between a variable input and output when all other inputs are held constant. For any level of employment of an input, the sum of marginal products of every unit of that input up to that level gives the total product of that input at that Both the marginal product and the average product curves are inverse  U -shaped. The marginal product curve cuts the average product curve from above at the maximum point of average product curve. In order to produce output, the firm chooses least cost input combinations. Total cost is the sum of total variable cost and the total fixed cost. Average cost is the sum of average variable cost and average fixed cost. Average fixed cost curve is downward sloping. Short run marginal cost, average variable cost and short run average cost curves SMC curve cuts the AVC curve from below at the minimum point of AVC. SMC curve cuts the SAC curve from below at the minimum point of SAC. In the short run, for any level of output, sum of marginal costs up to that level gives us the total variable cost. The area under the SMC curve up to any level of output gives us the total variable cost up to that level. Both LRAC and LRMC curves are  U  shaped. LRMC curve cuts the LRAC curve from below at the minimum point of LRAC. Law of diminishing marginal product Law of variable proportions Returns to scale Marginal cost, Average cost 1. Explain the concept of a production function. 2. What is the total product of an input? 3. What is the average product of an input? 4. What is the marginal product of an input? 5. Explain the relationship between the marginal products and the total product of an input. 6. Explain the concepts of the short run and the long run. 7. What is the law of diminishing marginal product? 8. What is the law of variable proportions? 9. When does a production function satisfy constant returns to scale? 10. When does a production function satisfy increasing returns to scale? Production and Costs 11. When does a production function satisfy decreasing returns to scale? 12. Briefly explain the concept of the cost function. 13. What are the total fixed cost, total variable cost and total cost of a firm? How are 14. What are the average fixed cost, average variable cost and average cost of a firm? How are they related? 15. Can there be some fixed cost in the long run? If not, why? 16. What does the average fixed cost curve look like? Why does it look so? 17. What do the short run marginal cost, average variable cost and short run average cost curves look like? 18. Why does the SMC curve cut the AVC curve at the minimum point of the AVC 19. At which point does the SMC curve cut the SAC curve? Give reason in support of your answer. 20. Why is the short run marginal cost curve  U -shaped? 21. What do the long run marginal cost and the average cost curves look like? 22. The following table gives the total product schedule of labour. Find the corresponding average product and marginal product schedules of labour. 23. The following table gives the average product schedule of labour. Find the total product and marginal product schedules. It is given that the total product is zero at zero level of labour employment. 24. The following table gives the marginal product schedule of labour. It is also given that total product of labour is zero at zero level of employment. Calculate the total and average product schedules of labour. 25. The following table shows the total cost schedule of a firm. What is the total fixed cost schedule of this firm? Calculate the TVC, AFC, AVC, SAC and SMC schedules of the firm. 26. The following table gives the total cost schedule of a firm. It is also given that the average fixed cost at 4 units of output is Rs 5. Find the TVC, TFC, AVC, AFC, SAC and SMC schedules of the firm for the corresponding values of output. 27. A firm s SMC schedule is shown in the following table. The total fixed cost of the firm is Rs 100. Find the TVC, TC, AVC and SAC schedules of the firm. 28. Let the production function of a firm be Q = 5 Find out the maximum possible output that the firm can produce with 100 units of L and 100 units of K. 29. Let the production function of a firm be Q = 2L2K2 Find out the maximum possible output that the firm can produce with 5 units of L and 2 units of K. What is the maximum possible output that the firm can produce with zero unit of L and 10 units of K? 30. Find out the maximum possible output for a firm with zero unit of L and 10 units of K when its production function is Q = 5L + 2K The Theory of the F y of the F y of the F y of the F y of the Firm In the previous chapter, we studied concepts related to a firm s production function and cost curves. The focus of this chapter is different. Here we ask: how does a firm decide how much to produce? Our answer to this question is by no means simple or uncontroversial. We base our answer on a critical, if somewhat unreasonable, assumption about firm behaviour   a firm, we maintain, is a ruthless profit maximiser. So, the amount that a firm produces and sells in the market is that which maximises its profit. Here, we also assume that the firm sells whatever it produces so that  output  and quantity sold are often used interchangebly. The structure of this chapter is as follows. We first set up and examine in detail the profit maximisation problem of a firm. Then,0 we derive a firm s supply curve. The supply curve shows the levels of output that a firm chooses to produce at different  market prices. Finally, we study how to aggregate the supply curves of individual firms and obtain the market supply curve. 4.1 PERFECT COMPETITION: DEFINING FEATURES In order to analyse a firm s profit maximisation problem, we must first specify the market environment in which the firm functions. In this chapter, we study a market environment called perfect competition. A perfectly competitive market has the following 1. The market consists of a large number of buyers and sellers 2. Each firm produces and sells a homogenous product. i.e., the product of one firm cannot be differentiated from the product of any other firm. 3. Entry into the market as well as exit from the market are free 4. Information is perfect. The existence of a large number of buyers and sellers means that each individual buyer and seller is very small compared to the size of the market. This means that no individual buyer or seller can influence the market by their size. Homogenous products further mean that the product of each firm is identical. So a buyer can choose to buy from any firm in the market, and she gets the same product. Free entry and exit mean that it is easy for firms to enter the market, as well as to leave it. This condition is essential for the large numbers of firms to exist. If entry was difficult, or restricted, then the number of firms in the market could be small. Perfect information implies that all buyers and all sellers are completely informed about the price, quality and other relevant details about the product, as well as the market. These features result in the single most distinguishing characteristic of perfect competition: price taking behaviour. From the viewpoint of a firm, what does price-taking entail? A price-taking firm believes that if it sets a price above the market price, it will be unable to sell any quantity of the good that it produces. On the other hand, should the set price be less than or equal to the market price, the firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell. From the viewpoint of a buyer, what does price-taking entail? A buyer would obviously like to buy the good at the lowest possible price. However, a price-taking buyer believes that if she asks for a price below the market price, no firm will be willing to sell to her. On the other hand, should the price asked be greater than or equal to the market price, the buyer can obtain as many units of the good as she desires to buy. Price-taking is often thought to be a reasonable assumption when the market has many firms and buyers have perfect information about the price prevailing in the market. Why? Let us start with a situation where each firm in the market charges the same (market) price. Suppose, now, that a certain firm raises its price above the market price. Observe that since all firms produce the same good and all buyers are aware of the market price, the firm in question loses all its buyers. Furthermore, as these buyers switch their purchases to other firms, no  adjustment  problems arise; their demand is readily accommodated when there are so many other firms in the market. Recall, now, that an individual firm s inability to sell any amount of the good at a price exceeding the market price is precisely what the price-taking assumption stipulates. We have indicated that in a perfectly competitive market, a firm believes that it can sell as many units of the good as it wants by setting a price less than or equal to the market price. But, if this is the case, surely there is no reason to set a price lower than the market price. In other words, should the firm desire to sell some amount of the good, the price that it sets is exactly equal to the market price. A firm earns revenue by selling the good that it produces in the market. Let the market price of a unit of the good be p. Let q be the quantity of the good produced, and therefore sold, by the firm at price p. Then, total revenue (TR) of the firm is defined as the market price of the good (p) multiplied by the firm s output (q). Hence, TR = p   q To make matters concrete, consider the following numerical example. Let the market for candles be perfectly competitive and let the market price of a box of candles be Rs 10. For a candle manufacturer, Table 4.1 shows how total revenue is related to output. Notice that when no box is sold, TR is equal to zero; if one box of candles is sold, TR is equal to 1 Rs 10= Rs 10; if two boxes of candles are produced, TR is equal to 2   Rs 10 = Rs 20; and so on. We can depict how the total revenue changes as the quantity sold changes through a Total Revenue Curve. A total revenue curve plots TR (in Rs) Table 4.1: Total Revenue The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition the quantity sold or output on the X-axis and the Revenue earned on the Y-axis. Figure 4.1 shows the total revenue curve of a firm. Three observations are relevant here. First, when the output is zero, the total revenue of the firm is also zero. Therefore, the TR curve passes through point O. Second, the total revenue increases as the output goes up. Moreover, the equation  TR = p    q  is that of a straight line because p is constant. This means that the TR curve is an upward rising straight line. Third, consider the slope of this straight line. When the output is one unit (horizontal distance Oq1 in Figure 4.1), the total revenue (vertical height Aq1 in Figure 4.1) is p   1 = p. Therefore, the slope of the straight line is Aq1/Oq1 = p. The average revenue ( AR ) of a firm is defined as total revenue per unit of output. Recall that if a firm s output is q and the market price is p, then TR equals p   q. AR = TR q  = p In other words, for a price-taking firm, average revenue equals the Now consider Figure 4.2. Here, we plot the average revenue or market price (y-axis) for different values of a firm s output (x-axis). Since the market price is fixed at p, we obtain a horizontal straight line that cuts the y-axis at a height equal to p. This horizontal straight line is called the price line. It is also the firm s AR curve under perfect competition The price line also depicts the demand curve facing a firm. Observe that the demand curve is perfectly elastic. This means that a firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell at price p. The marginal revenue (MR) of a firm is defined as the increase in total revenue for a unit increase in the firm s output. Consider table 4.1 again. Total revenue from the sale of 2 boxes of candles is Rs.20. Total revenue from the sale of 3 boxes of candles is Rs.30. Price Line. The price line shows the relationship between the market price and a firm s output level. The vertical height of the price line is equal to the market price, p. Total Revenue curve. The total revenue curve of a firm shows the relationship between the total revenue that the firm earns and the output level of the firm. The slope of the curve, Aq1/Oq1, is the Is it a coincidence that this is the same as the price? Actually it is not. Consider the situation when the firm s output changes from q1 to q2. Given the market MR = (pq2  pq1)/ (q2  q1) = [p (q2  q1)]/ (q2  q1) Thus, for the perfectly competitive firm, MR=AR=p In other words, for a price-taking firm, marginal revenue equals the market Setting the algebra aside, the intuition for this result is quite simple. When a firm increases its output by one unit, this extra unit is sold at the market price. Hence, the firm s increase in total revenue from the one-unit output expansion   that is, MR   is precisely the market price. 4.3 PROFIT MAXIMISATION A firm produces and sells a certain amount of a good. The firm s profit, denoted by   1, is defined to be the difference between its total revenue (TR) and its total cost of production (TC ). In other words   = TR   TC Clearly, the gap between TR and TC is the firm s earnings net of costs. A firm wishes to maximise its profit. The firm would like to identify the quantity q0 at which its profits are maximum. By definition, then, at any quantity other than q0, the firm s profits are less than at q0. The critical question is: how do we For profits to be maximum, three conditions must hold at q0: 1. The price, p, must equal MC 2. Marginal cost must be non-decreasing at q0 3. For the firm to continue to produce, in the short run, price must be greater than the average variable cost (p > AVC); in the long run, price must be greater than the average cost (p > AC). 4.3.1 Condition 1 Profits are the difference between total revenue and total cost. Both total revenue and total cost increase as output increases. Notice that as long as the change in total revenue is greater than the change in total cost, profits will continue to increase. Recall that change in total revenue per unit increase in output is the marginal revenue; and the change in total cost per unit increase in output is the marginal cost. Therefore, we can conclude that as long as marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, profits are increasing. By the same logic, as long as marginal revenue is less than marginal cost, profits will fall. It follows that for profits to be maximum, marginal revenue should equal marginal cost. In other words, profits are maximum at the level of output (which we have called q0) for which MR = MC For the perfectly competitive firm, we have established that the MR = P. So the firm s profit maximizing output becomes the level of output at which P=MC. 4.3.2 Condition 2 Consider the second condition that must hold when the profit-maximising output level is positive. Why is it the case that the marginal cost curve cannot slope 1It is a convention in economics to denote profit with the Greek letter. The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition downwards at the profit- maximising output level? To answer this question, refer once again to Figure 4.3. Note that at output levels q1 and q4, the market price is equal to the marginal cost. However, at the output level q1, the marginal cost curve is downward sloping. We claim that q1 cannot be a profit-maximising output level. Observe that for all output levels slightly to the left of q1, the market price is lower than the marginal cost. But, the argument outlined in  section 4.3.1 immediately implies that the firm s profit at an output level slightly smaller than q1 exceeds that corresponding to the output level q1. This being the case, q1 cannot be a profit-maximising 4.3.3 Condition 3 Consider the third condition that must hold when the profit- maximising output level is positive. Notice that the third condition has two parts: one part applies in the short run while the other applies in the long run. Case 1: Price must be greater than or equal to AVC in the We will show that the statement of Case 1 (see above) is true by arguing that a profit- maximising firm, in the short run, will not produce at an output level wherein the market price is lower than the AVC. Let us turn to Figure 4.4. Observe that at the output level q1, the market price p is lower than the AVC. We claim that q1 cannot be a profit-maximising output level. Why? Notice that the firm s total revenue at q1 is as follows TR = Price   = Vertical height Op   width Oq1 = The area of rectangle OpAq1 Maximisation (Short Run).  The figure is used to demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm produces zero output in the short run when the market price, p, is less than the minimum of its average variable cost (AVC). If the firm s output level is q1, the firm s total variable cost exceeds its revenue by an amount equal to the area of rectangle pEBA. Conditions 1 and 2 for profit maximisation. The figure is used to demonstrate that when the market price is p, the output level of a profit- maximising firm cannot be q1 (marginal cost curve, MC, is downward sloping), q2 and q3 (market price exceeds marginal cost), or q5 and q6 (marginal cost exceeds market price). Similarly, the firm s total variable cost at q1 is as follows TVC = Average variable cost   Quantity = Vertical height OE   Width Oq1 = The area of rectangle OEBq1 Now recall that the firm s profit at q1 is TR   (TVC + TFC); that is, [the area of rectangle OpAq1]   [the area of rectangle OEBq1]   TFC. What happens if the firm produces zero output? Since output is zero, TR and TVC are zero as well. Hence, the firm s profit at zero output is equal to   TFC. But, the area of rectangle OpAq1 is strictly less than the area of rectangle OEBq1. Hence, the firm s profit at q1 is [(area EBAp)-TFC], which is strictly less than what it obtains by not producing at all. So, the firm will choose not to produce at  all, and exit from the Case 2: Price must be greater than or equal to AC in the We will show that the statement of Case 2 (see above) is true by arguing that a profit-maximising firm, in the long run, will not produce at an output level wherein the market price is lower than the AC. Let us turn to Figure 4.5. Observe that at the output level q1, the market price p is lower than the (long run) AC. We claim that q1 cannot be a profit-maximising output level. Why? Notice that the firm s total revenue, TR, at q1 is the area of the rectangle OpAq1 (the product of price and quantity) while the firm s total cost, TC, is the area of the rectangle OEBq1 (the product of average cost and quantity). Since the area of rectangle OEBq1 is larger than the area of rectangle OpAq1, the firm incurs a loss at the output level q1. But, in the long run set-up, a firm that shuts down production has a profit of zero. Again, the firm chooses to exit in 4.3.4 The Profit Maximisation Using the material in sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3, let us graphically Maximisation (Long Run). The figure is used to demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm produces zero output in the long run when the market price, p, is less than the minimum of its long run average cost (LRAC). If the firm s output level is q1, the firm s total cost exceeds its revenue by an amount equal to the area of rectangle pEBA. Geometric Representation of Profit Maximisation (Short Run). Given market price p, the output level of a profit-maximising firm is q0. At q0, the firm s profit is equal to the area of rectangle EpAB. The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition maximisation problem in the short run. Consider Figure 4.6. Notice that the market price is p. Equating the market price with the (short run) marginal cost, we obtain the output level q0. At q0, observe that SMC slopes upwards and p exceeds AVC. Since the three conditions discussed in sections 3.1-3.3 are satisfied at q0, we maintain that the profit-maximising output level of the firm is q0. What happens at q0? The total revenue of the firm at q0 is the area of rectangle OpAq0 (the product of price and quantity) while the total cost at q0 is the area of rectangle OEBq0 (the product of short run average cost and quantity). So, at q0, the firm earns a profit equal to the area of the rectangle EpAB. 4.4 SUPPLY CURVE OF A FIRM A firm s  supply  is the quantity that it chooses to sell at a given price, given technology, and given the prices of factors of production. A table describing the quantities sold by a firm at various prices, technology and prices of factors remaining unchanged, is called a supply schedule. We may also represent the information as a graph, called a supply curve. The supply curve of a firm shows the levels of output (plotted on the x-axis) that the firm chooses to produce corresponding to different values of the market price (plotted on the y-axis), again keeping technology and prices of factors of production unchanged. We distinguish between the short run supply curve and the long run supply 4.4.1 Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm Let us turn to Figure 4.7 and derive a firm s short run supply curve. We shall split this derivation into two parts. We first determine a firm s profit-maximising output level when the market price is greater than or equal to the minimum AVC. This done, we determine the firm s profit-maximising output level when the market price is less than the minimum AVC. Case 1: Price is greater than or equal to the minimum AVC Suppose the market price is p1, which exceeds the minimum AVC. We start out by equating p1 with SMC on the rising part of the SMC curve; this leads to the output level q1. Note also that the AVC at q1 does not exceed the market price, p1. Thus, all three conditions highlighted in section 3 are satisfied at q1. Hence, when the market price is p1, the firm s output level in the short run is equal to q1. Case 2: Price is less than the Suppose the market price is p2, which is less than the minimum AVC. We have argued (see Market Price Values. The figure shows the output levels chosen by a profit-maximising firm in the short run for two values of the market price: p1 and p2. When the market price is p1, the output level of the firm is q1; when the market price is p2, the firm produces zero output. condition 3 in section 3) that if a profit-maximising firm produces a positive output in the short run, then the market price, p2, must be greater than or equal to the AVC at that output level. But notice from Figure 4.7 that for all positive output levels, AVC strictly exceeds p2. In other words, it cannot be the case that the firm supplies a positive output. So, if the market price is p2, the firm produces zero Combining cases 1 and 2, we reach an important conclusion. A firm s short run supply curve is the rising part of the SMC curve from and above the minimum AVC together with zero output for all prices strictly less than the minimum AVC. In figure 4.8, the bold line represents the short run supply curve of the firm. 4.4.2 Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm Let us turn to Figure 4.9 and derive the firm s long run supply curve. As in the short run case, we split the derivation into two parts. We first determine the firm s profit-maximising output level when the market price is greater than or equal to the minimum (long run) AC. This done, we determine the firm s profit- maximising output level when the market price is less than the minimum (long run) AC. Case 1: Price greater than or equal to the minimum LRAC Suppose the market price is p1, which exceeds the minimum LRAC. Upon equating p1 with LRMC on the rising part of the LRMC curve, we obtain output level q1. Note also that the LRAC at q1 does not exceed the market price, p1. Thus, all three conditions highlighted in section 3 are satisfied at q1. Hence, when the market price is p1, the firm s supplies in the long run become an output equal to q1. Case 2: Price less than the minimum LRAC Suppose the market price is p2, which is less than the minimum LRAC. We have The Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The short run supply curve of a firm, which is based on its short run marginal cost curve (SMC) and average variable cost curve (AVC), is represented by the bold line. Profit maximisation in the Long Run for Different Market Price Values. The figure shows the output levels chosen by a profit- maximising firm in the long run for two values of the market price: p1 and p2. When the market price is p1, the output level of the firm is q1; when the market price is p2, the firm produces The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition argued (see condition 3 in section 3) that if a profit-maximising firm produces a positive output in the long run, the market price, p2, must be greater than or equal to the LRAC at that output level. But notice from Figure 4.9 that for all positive output levels, LRAC strictly exceeds p2. In other words, it cannot be the case that the firm supplies a positive output. So, when the market price is p2, the firm produces zero output. Combining cases 1 and 2, we reach an important conclusion. A firm s long run supply curve is the rising part of the LRMC curve from and above the minimum LRAC together with zero output for all prices less than the minimum LRAC. In Figure 4.10, the bold line represents the long run supply curve of the firm. 4.4.3 The Shut Down Point Previously, while deriving the supply curve, we have discussed that in the short run the firm continues to produce as long as the price remains greater than or equal to the minimum of AVC. Therefore, along the supply curve as we move down, the last price-output combination at which the firm produces positive output is the point of minimum AVC where the SMC curve cuts the AVC curve. Below this, there will be no production. This point is called the short run shut down point of the firm. In the long run, however, the shut down point is the minimum of LRAC curve. 4.4.4 The Normal Profit and Break-even Point The minimum level of profit that is needed to keep a firm in the existing business is defined as normal profit. A firm that does not make normal profits is not going to continue in business. Normal profits are therefore a part of the firm s total costs. It may be useful to think of them as an opportunity cost for entrepreneurship. Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is called the super-normal profit. In the long run, a firm does not produce if it earns anything less than the normal profit. In the short run, however, it may produce even if the profit is less than this level. The point on the supply curve at which a firm earns only normal profit is called the break-even point of the firm. The point of minimum average cost at which the supply curve cuts the LRAC curve (in short run, SAC curve) is therefore the break-even point of a firm. The Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The long run supply curve of a firm, which is based on its long run marginal cost curve (LRMC) and long run average cost curve (LRAC), is represented by the bold line. In economics, one often encounters the concept of opportunity cost. Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity. Suppose you have Rs 1,000 which you decide to invest in your family business. What is the opportunity cost of your action? If you do not invest 4.5 DETERMINANTS OF A FIRM S SUPPLY CURVE In the previous section, we have seen that a firm s supply curve is a part of its marginal cost curve. Thus, any factor that affects a firm s marginal cost curve is of course a determinant of its supply curve. In this section, we discuss two 4.5.1 Technological Progress Suppose a firm uses two factors of production   say, capital and labour   to produce a certain good. Subsequent to an organisational innovation by the firm, the same levels of capital and labour now produce more units of output. Put differently, to produce a given level of output, the organisational innovation allows the firm to use fewer units of inputs. It is expected that this will lower the firm s marginal cost at any level of output; that is, there is a rightward (or downward) shift of the MC curve. As the firm s supply curve is essentially a segment of the MC curve, technological progress shifts the supply curve of the firm to the right. At any given market price, the firm now supplies more units of output. 4.5.2 Input Prices A change in input prices also affects a firm s supply curve. If the price of an input (say, the wage rate of labour) increases, the cost of production rises. The consequent increase in the firm s average cost at any level of output is usually accompanied by an increase in the firm s marginal cost at any level of output; that is, there is a leftward (or upward) shift of the MC curve. This means that the firm s supply curve shifts to the left: at any given market price, the firm now supplies fewer units of output. this money, you can either keep it in the house-safe which will give you zero return or you can deposit it in either bank-1 or bank-2 in which case you get an interest at the rate of 10 per cent or 5 per cent respectively. So the maximum benefit that you may get from other alternative activities is the interest from the bank-1. But this opportunity will no longer be there once you invest the money in your family business. The opportunity cost of investing the money in your family business is therefore the amount of forgone interest from the Impact of a unit tax on supply A unit tax is a tax that the government imposes per unit sale of output. For example, suppose that the unit tax imposed by the government is Rs 2. Then, if the firm produces and sells 10 units of the good, the total tax that the firm must pay to the government is 10   Rs 2 = Rs 20. How does the long run supply curve of a firm change when a unit tax is imposed? Let us turn to figure 4.11. Before the unit tax is imposed, LRMC0 and LRAC0 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long run average cost curve of the firm. Now, suppose the government puts in place a unit tax of Rs t. Since the firm must pay an extra Rs t for each unit of the good produced, the firm s long run average cost and long run marginal cost at any level of output increases by Rs t. In Figure 4.11, LRMC1 and LRAC1 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long run average cost curve of the firm upon imposition of the unit tax. The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition 4.6 MARKET SUPPLY CURVE The market supply curve shows the output levels (plotted on the x-axis) that firms in the market produce in aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price (plotted on the y-axis). How is the market supply curve derived? Consider a market with n firms: firm 1, firm 2, firm 3, and so on. Suppose the market price is fixed at p. Then, the output produced by the n firms in aggregate is [supply of firm 1 at price p] + [supply of firm 2 at price p] +... + [supply of firm n at price p]. In other words, the market supply at price p is the summation of the supplies of individual firms at that price. Let us now construct the market supply curve geometrically with just two firms in the market: firm 1 and firm 2. The two firms have different cost structures. Firm 1 will not produce anything if the market price is less than p  while firm 2 will not produce anything if the market price is less than p. Assume also that p  is greater than In panel (a) of Figure 4.13 we have the supply curve of firm 1, denoted by S1; in panel (b), we have the supply curve of firm 2, denoted by S2. Panel (c) of Figure 4.13 shows the market supply curve, denoted by Sm. When the market price is strictly below p, both firms choose not to produce any amount of the good; hence, market supply will also be zero for all such prices. For a market Recall that the long run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the LRMC curve from and above the minimum LRAC together with zero output for all prices less than the minimum LRAC. Using this observation in Figure 4.12, it is immediate that S0 and S1 are, respectively, the long run supply curve of the firm before and after the imposition of the unit tax. Notice that the unit tax shifts the firm s long run supply curve to the left: at any given market price, the firm now supplies fewer units of output. Cost Curves and the Unit Tax. LRAC0 and LRMC0 are, respectively, the long run average cost curve and the long run marginal cost curve of a firm before a unit tax is imposed. LRAC1 and LRMC1 are, respectively, the long run average cost curve and the long run marginal cost curve of a firm after a unit tax of Rs t is imposed. Supply Curves and Unit Tax. S0 is the supply curve of a firm before a unit tax is imposed. After a unit tax of Rs t is imposed, S1 represents the supply curve of the firm. price greater than or equal to p  but strictly less than p, only firm 1 will produce a positive amount of the good. Therefore, in this range, the market supply curve coincides with the supply curve of firm 1. For a market price greater than or p, both firms will have positive output levels. For example, consider a situation wherein the market price assumes the value p3 (observe that p3 p ). Given p3, firm 1 supplies q3 units of output while firm 2 supplies q4 units of output. So, the market supply at price p3 is q5, where q5 = q3 + q4. Notice how the market supply curve, Sm, in panel (c) is being constructed: we obtain Sm by taking a horizontal summation of the supply curves of the two firms in the market, S1 and S2. The Market Supply Curve Panel. (a) shows the supply curve of firm 1. Panel (b) shows the supply curve of firm 2. Panel (c) shows the market supply curve, which is obtained by taking a horizontal summation of the supply curves of the two firms. It should be noted that the market supply curve has been derived for a fixed number of firms in the market. As the number of firms changes, the market supply curve shifts as well. Specifically, if the number of firms in the market increases (decreases), the market supply curve shifts to the right (left). We now supplement the graphical analysis given above with a related numerical example. Consider a market with two firms: firm 1 and firm 2. Let the supply curve of firm 1 be as follows   10: Notice that S1(p) indicates that (1) firm 1 produces an output of 0 if the market price, p, is strictly less than 10, and (2) firm 1 produces an output of (p   10) if the market price, p, is greater than or equal to 10. Let the supply curve of firm 2 be as follows   15: The interpretation of S2(p) is identical to that of S1(p), and is, hence, omitted. Now, the market supply curve, Sm(p), simply sums up the supply curves of the two firms; in other words Sm(p) = S1(p) + S2(p) The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition But, this means that Sm(p) is as follows 4.7 PRICE ELASTICITY OF SUPPLY The price elasticity of supply of a good measures the responsiveness of quantity supplied to changes in the price of the good. More specifically, the price elasticity of supply, denoted by eS, is defined as follows Price elasticity of supply, eS = Percentage change in quantity supplied Percentage change in price price changes by P cricket balls are produced in aggregate by the firms in the market. The percentage change in quantity supplied and market price can be estimated using the information summarised in the table below: Percentage change in quantity supplied= Percentage change in market price = Price of Cricket balls (P) Quantity of Cricket balls produced and sold (Q) Old price: P1 = 10 Old quantity: Q1 = 200 New price: P2 = 30 New quantity: Q2 = 1000 Therefore, price elasticity of supply, eS When the supply curve is vertical, supply is completely insensitive to price and the elasticity of supply is zero. In other cases, when supply curve is positively sloped, with a rise in price, supply rises and hence, the elasticity of supply is positive. Like the price elasticity of demand, the price elasticity of supply is also independent of units. The Geometric Method Consider the Figure 4.14. Panel (a) shows a straight line supply curve. S is a point on the supply curve. It cuts the price-axis at its positive range and as we extend the straight line, it cuts the quantity-axis at M which is at its negative range. The price elasticity of this supply curve at the point S is given by the ratio, Mq0/Oq0. For any point S on such a supply curve, we see that Mq0 > Oq0. The elasticity at any point on such a supply curve, therefore, will be greater In panel (c) we consider a straight line supply curve and S is a point on it. It cuts the quantity-axis at M which is at its positive range. Again the price elasticity of this supply curve at the point S is given by the ratio, Mq0/Oq0. Now, Mq0 < Oq0 and hence, eS < 1. S can be any point on the supply curve, and therefore at all points on such a supply curve eS < 1. Now we come to panel (b). Here the supply curve goes through the origin. One can imagine that the point M has coincided with the origin here, i.e., Mq0 has become equal to Oq0. The price elasticity of this supply curve at the point S is given by the ratio, Oq0/Oq0 which is equal to 1. At any point on a straight line, supply curve going through the origin price elasticity will be Price Elasticity Associated with Straight Line Supply Curves. In panel (a), price elasticity (eS) at S is greater than 1. In panel (b), price elasticity (eS) at S is equal to 1. In panel (c), price elasticity (eS) at S is less than 1. The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition In a perfectly competitive market, firms are price-takers. The total revenue of a firm is the market price of the good multiplied by the firm s output of the good. For a price-taking firm, average revenue is equal to market price. For a price-taking firm, marginal revenue is equal to market price. The demand curve that a firm faces in a perfectly competitive market is perfectly elastic; it is a horizontal straight line at the market price. The profit of a firm is the difference between total revenue earned and total cost If there is a positive level of output at which a firm s profit is maximised in the short run, three conditions must hold at that output level (i) p = SMC (ii) SMC is non-decreasing (iii) p   AV C. If there is a positive level of output at which a firm s profit is maximised in the long run, three conditions must hold at that output level (i)  p = LRMC (ii) LRMC is non-decreasing (iii) p   LRAC. The short run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the SMC curve from and above minimum AVC together with 0 output for all prices less than the minimum The long run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the LRMC curve from and above minimum LRAC together with 0 output for all prices less than the minimum Technological progress is expected to shift the supply curve of a firm to the right. An increase (decrease) in input prices is expected to shift the supply curve of a firm to the left (right). The imposition of a unit tax shifts the supply curve of a firm to the left. The market supply curve is obtained by the horizontal summation of the supply curves of individual firms. The price elasticity of supply of a good is the percentage change in quantity supplied due to one per cent change in the market price of the good. 1. What are the characteristics of a perfectly competitive market? 2. How are the total revenue of a firm, market price, and the quantity sold by the firm related to each other? 3. What is the  price line ? 4. Why is the total revenue curve of a price-taking firm an upward-sloping straight line? Why does the curve pass through the origin? Firms supply curve Market supply curve Price elasticity of supply 5. What is the relation between market price and average revenue of a price- 6. What is the relation between market price and marginal revenue of a price- 7. What conditions must hold if a profit-maximising firm produces positive output in a competitive market? 8. Can there be a positive level of output that a profit-maximising firm produces in a competitive market at which market price is not equal to marginal cost? Give an explanation. 9. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market ever produce a positive level of output in the range where the marginal cost is falling? Give an 10. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market produce a positive level of output in the short run if the market price is less than the minimum of AVC? Give an explanation. 11. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market produce a positive level of output in the long run if the market price is less than the minimum of AC? Give an explanation. 12. What is the supply curve of a firm in the short run? 13. What is the supply curve of a firm in the long run? 14. How does technological progress affect the supply curve of a firm? 15. How does the imposition of a unit tax affect the supply curve of a firm? 16. How does an increase in the price of an input affect the supply curve of a firm? 17. How does an increase in the number of firms in a market affect the market 18. What does the price elasticity of supply mean? How do we measure it? 19. Compute the total revenue, marginal revenue and average revenue schedules in the following table. Market price of each unit of the good is Rs 10. 20. The following table shows the total revenue and total cost schedules of a competitive firm. Calculate the profit at each output level. Determine also the market price of the The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition 21. The following table shows the total cost schedule of a competitive firm. It is given that the price of the good is Rs 10. Calculate the profit at each output level. Find the profit maximising level of 22. Consider a market with two firms. The following table shows the supply schedules of the two firms: the SS1 column gives the supply schedule of firm 1 and the SS2 column gives the supply schedule of firm 2. Compute the market supply schedule. 23. Consider a market with two firms. In the following table, columns labelled as SS1 and SS2 give the supply schedules of firm 1 and firm 2 respectively. Compute the market supply schedule. 24. There are three identical firms in a market. The following table shows the supply schedule of firm 1. Compute the market supply schedule. 25. A firm earns a revenue of Rs 50 when the market price of a good is Rs 10. The market price increases to Rs 15 and the firm now earns a revenue of Rs 150. What is the price elasticity of the firm s supply curve? 26. The market price of a good changes from Rs 5 to Rs 20. As a result, the quantity supplied by a firm increases by 15 units. The price elasticity of the firm s supply curve is 0.5. Find the initial and final output levels of the firm. 27. At the market price of Rs 10, a firm supplies 4 units of output. The market price increases to Rs 30. The price elasticity of the firm s supply is 1.25. What quantity will the firm supply at the new price? This chapter will be built on the foundation laid down in Chapters 2 and 4 where we studied the consumer and firm behaviour when they are price takers. In Chapter 2, we have seen that an individual s demand curve for a commodity tells us what quantity a consumer is willing to buy at different prices when he takes price as given. The market demand curve in turn tells us how much of the commodity all the consumers taken together are willing to purchase at different prices when everyone takes price as given. In Chapter 4, we have seen that an individual firm s supply curve tells us the quantity of the commodity that a profit-maximising firm would wish to sell at different prices when it takes price as given and the market supply curve tells us how much of the commodity all the firms taken together would wish to supply at different prices when each firm takes price as given. In this chapter, we combine both consumers  and firms  behaviour to study market equilibrium through demand-supply analysis and determine at what price equilibrium will be attained. We also examine the effects of demand and supply shifts on equilibrium. At the end of the chapter, we will look at some of the applications of demand-supply analysis. 5.1 EQUILIBRIUM, EXCESS DEMAND, EXCESS SUPPLY A perfectly competitive market consists of buyers and sellers who are driven by their self-interested objectives. Recall from Chapters 2 and 4 that objectives of the consumers are to maximise their respective preference and that of the firms are to maximise their respective profits. Both the consumers  and firms  objectives are compatible in the equilibrium. An equilibrium is defined as a situation where the plans of all consumers and firms in the market match and the market clears. In equilibrium, the aggregate quantity that all firms wish to sell equals the quantity that all the consumers in the market wish to buy; in other words, market supply equals market demand. The price at which equilibrium is reached is called equilibrium price and the quantity bought and sold at this price is called equilibrium quantity. Therefore, (p*, q*) is an equilibrium if qD(p ) = qS(p ) where p  denotes the equilibrium price and qD(p ) and qS(p ) denote the market demand and market supply of the commodity respectively at price p. If at a price, market supply is greater than market demand, we say that there is an excess supply in the market at that price and if market demand exceeds market supply at a price, it is said that excess demand exists in the market at that price. Therefore, equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market can be defined alternatively as zero excess demand-zero excess supply situation. Whenever market supply is not equal to market demand, and hence the market is not in equilibrium, there will be a tendency for the price to change. In the next two sections, we will try to understand what drives this change. From the time of Adam Smith (1723-1790), it has been maintained that in a perfectly competitive market an  Invisible Hand  is at play which changes price whenever there is imbalance in the market. Our intuition also tells us that this  Invisible Hand  should raise the prices in case of  excess demand  and lower the prices in case of  excess supply. Throughout our analysis we shall maintain that the  Invisible Hand  plays this very important role. Moreover, we shall take it that the  Invisible Hand  by following this process is able to reach the equilibrium. This assumption will be taken to hold in all that we discuss in the text. 5.1.1 Market Equilibrium: Fixed Number of Firms Recall that in Chapter 2 we have derived the market demand curve for price- taking consumers, and for price-taking firms the market supply curve was derived in Chapter 4 under the assumption of a fixed number of firms. In this section with the help of these two curves we will look at how supply and demand forces work together to determine where the market will be in equilibrium when the number of firms is fixed. We will also study how the equilibrium price and quantity change due to shifts in demand and supply curves. Figure 5.1 illustrates equilibrium for a perfectly competitive market with a fixed number of firms. Here SS denotes the market supply curve and DD denotes the market demand curve for a commodity. The market supply curve SS commodity, firms would wish to supply at different prices, and the demand curve DD tells us how much of the commodity, the consumers would be willing to purchase at different prices. Graphically, an equilibrium is a point where the market supply curve intersects the market demand curve because this is where the market demand equals market supply. At any other point, either there is excess supply or Market Equilibrium with Fixed Number of Firms. Equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the market demand curve DD and market supply curve SS. The equilibrium quantity is q* and the equilibrium price is p*. At a price greater than p*, there will be excess supply, and at a price below p*, there will be there is excess demand. To see what happens when market demand does not equal market supply, let us look in figure 5.1 again. In Figure 5.1, if the prevailing price is p1, the market demand is q1 whereas the market supply is q'. Therefore, there is excess demand in the market equal q' q1. Some consumers who are either unable to obtain the commodity at all or obtain it in insufficient quantity will be willing to pay more than p1. The market price would tend to increase. All other things remaining the same as price rises, quantity demanded falls and quantity supplied increases. The market moves towards the point where the quantity that the firms want to sell is equal to the quantity that the consumers want to buy. This happens when price is p*, the supply decisions of the firms only match with the demand decisions of the Similarly, if the prevailing price is p2, the market supply (q2) will exceed the market demand ( q '  ) at that price giving rise to excess supply equal to q ' q2. Some firms will not be then able to sell  quantity they want to sell; so, they will lower their price. All other things remaining the same as price falls, quantity demanded rises, quantity supplied falls, and at p*, the firms are able to sell their desired output since market demand equals market supply at that price. Therefore, p* is the equilibrium price and the corresponding quantity q* is the To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more clearly, let us explain it through an example. Let us consider the example of a market consisting of identical1 farms producing same quality of wheat. Suppose the market demand curve and the market supply curve for wheat are given by: qD = 200   p for 0   p   200 for p > 200 qS = 120 + p for p   10 for 0   p < 10 where qD and qS denote the demand for and supply of wheat (in kg) respectively and p denotes the price of wheat per kg in rupees. Since at equilibrium price market clears, we find the equilibrium price (denoted by p*) by equating market demand and supply and solve for p*. qD(p*) = qS(p*) 200   p* = 120 + p* 2p* = 80 p* = 40 Therefore, the equilibrium price of wheat is Rs 40 per kg. The equilibrium quantity (denoted by q*) is obtained by substituting the equilibrium price into either the demand or the supply curve s equation since in equilibrium quantity demanded and supplied are equal. 1Here, by identical we mean that all farms have same cost structure. qD = q* = 200   40 = 160 qS = q* = 120 + 40 = 160 Thus, the equilibrium quantity is 160 kg. At a price less than p*, say p1 = 25 qD = 200   25 = 175 qS = 120 + 25 = 145 Therefore, at p1 = 25, qD > qS which implies that there is excess demand at Algebraically, excess demand (ED) can be expressed as ED(p) = qD   qS = 200   p   (120 + p) = 80   2p Notice from the above expression that for any price less than p*(= 40), excess demand will be positive. Similarly, at a price greater than p*, say p2 = 45 qD = 200   45 = 155 qS = 120 + 45 = 165 Therefore, there is excess supply at this price since qS > qD. Algebraically, excess supply (ES) can be expressed as ES(p) = qS   qD = 120 + p   (200   p) = 2p   80 Notice from the above expression that for any price greater than p*(= 40), excess supply will be positive. Therefore, at any price greater than p*, there will be excess supply, and at any price lower than p*,there will be excess demand. Wage Determination in Labour Market Here we will briefly discuss the theory of wage determination under a perfectly competitive market structure using the demand-supply analysis. The basic difference between a labour market and a market for goods is with respect to the source of supply and demand. In the labour market, households are the suppliers of labour and the demand for labour comes from firms whereas in the market for goods, it is the opposite. Here, it is important to point out that by labour, we mean the hours of work provided by labourers and not the number of labourers. The wage rate is determined at the intersection of the demand and supply curves of labour where the demand for and supply of labour balance. We shall now see what the demand and supply curves of labour look like. To examine the demand for labour by a single firm, we assume that the labour is the only variable factor of production and the labour market is perfectly competitive, which in turn, implies that each firm takes wage rate as given. Also, the firm we are concerned with, is perfectly competitive in nature and carries out production with the goal of profit maximisation. We also assume that given the technology of the firm, the law of diminishing marginal product holds. The firm being a profit maximiser will always employ labour upto the point where the extra cost she incurs for employing the last unit of labour is equal to the additional benefit she earns from that unit. The extra cost of hiring one more unit of labour is the wage rate (w). The extra output produced by one more unit of labour is its marginal product (MPL) and by selling each extra unit of output, the additional earning of the firm is the marginal revenue (MR) she gets from that unit. Therefore, for each extra unit of labour, she gets an additional benefit equal to marginal revenue times marginal product which is called Marginal Revenue Product of Labour (MRPL). Thus, while hiring labour, the firm employs labour up to the point where w = MRPL and MRPL = MR   MPL Since we are dealing with a perfectly competitive firm, marginal revenue is equal to the price of the commoditya and hence marginal revenue product of labour in this case is equal to the value of marginal product of labour (VMPL). As long as the VMPL is greater than the wage rate, the firm will earn more profit by hiring one more unit of labour, and if at any level of labour employment VMPL is less than the wage rate, the firm can increase her profit by reducing a unit of labour employed. Given the assumption of the law of diminishing marginal product, the fact that the firm always produces at w = VMPL implies that the demand curve for labour is downward sloping. To explain why it is so, let us assume at some wage rate w1, demand for labour is l1. Now, suppose the wage rate increases to w2. To maintain the wage-VMPL equality, VMPL should also increase. The price of the commodity remaining constantb, this is possible only if MPL increases which in turn implies that less labour should be employed owing to the diminishing marginal productivity of labour. Hence, at higher wage, less labour is demanded thereby leading to a downward sloping demand, curve. To arrive at the market demand curve from individual firms  demand curve, we simply add up the demand for labour by individual firms at different wages and since each firm demands less labour as wage increases, the market demand curve is also downward sloping. Wage is determined at the point where the labour demand and supply curves intersect. aRecall from Chapter 4 that for a perfectly competitive firm, marginal revenue equals price. bSince the firm under consideration is perfectly competitive, it believes it cannot influence the price of the commodity. Shifts in Demand and Supply In the above section, we studied market equilibrium under the assumption that tastes and preferences of the consumers, prices of the related commodities, incomes of the consumers, technology, size of the market, prices of the inputs used in production, etc remain constant. However, with changes in one or more of these factors either the supply or the demand curve or both may shift, thereby affecting the equilibrium price and quantity. Here, we first develop the general theory which outlines the impact of these shifts on equilibrium and then discuss the impact of changes in some of the above mentioned factors on equilibrium. Consider Figure 5.2 in which we depict the impact of demand shift when the number of firms is fixed. Here, the initial equilibrium point is E where the market demand curve DD0 and the market supply curve SS0 intersect so that q0 and p0 are the equilibrium quantity and price respectively. Having explored the demand side, we now turn to the supply side. As already mentioned, it is the households which determine how much labour to supply at a given wage rate. Their supply decision is essentially a choice between income and leisure. On the one hand, individuals enjoy leisure and find work irksome and on the other, they value income for which they must work. So there is a trade-off between enjoying leisure and spending more hours for work. To derive the labour supply curve for a single individual, let us assume at some wage rate w1, the individual supplies l1 units of labour. Now suppose the wage rises to w2. This increase in wage rate will have two effects: First, due to the increase in wage rate, the opportunity cost of leisure increases which makes leisure costlier. Therefore, the individual will want to enjoy less leisure. As a result, they will work for longer hours. Second, because of the increase in wage rate to w2, the purchasing power of the individual increases. So, she would want to spend more on leisure activities. The final effect of the increase in wage rate will depend on which of the two effects predominates. At low wage rates, the first effect dominates the second and so the individual will be willing to supply more labour with an increase in wage rate. But at high wage rates, the second effect dominates the first and the individual will be willing to supply less labour for every increase in wage rate. Thus, we get a backward bending individual labour supply curve which shows that up to a certain wage rate for every increase in wage rate, there is an increased supply of labour. Beyond this wage rate for every increase in wage rate, labour supply will decrease. Nevertheless, the market supply curve of labour, which we obtain by aggregating individuals  supply at different wages, will be upward sloping because though at higher wages some individuals may be willing to work less, many more individuals will be attracted to supply more labour. With an upward sloping supply curve and downward sloping demand curve, the equilibrium wage rate is determined at the point where these two curves intersect; in other words, where the labour that the households wish to supply is equal to the labour that the firms wish to hire. This is shown in Now suppose the market demand curve shifts rightward to DD2 with supply curve remaining unchanged at SS0, as shown in panel (a). This shift indicates that at any price the quantity demanded is more than before. Therefore, at price p0 now there is excess demand in the market equal to q q''. In response to this excess demand some individuals will be willing to pay higher price and the price would tend to rise. The new equilibrium is attained at G where the equilibrium quantity q2 is greater than q0 and the equilibrium price p2 is greater than p0. Similarly if the demand curve shifts leftward to DD1, as shown in panel (b), at any price the quantity demanded will be less than what it was before the shift. Therefore, at the initial equilibrium price p0 now there will be excess supply in the market equal to q' q  in response to which some firms will reduce the price of their commodity so that they can sell their desired quantity. The new equilibrium is attained at the point F at which the demand curve DD1 and the supply curve SS0 intersect and the resulting equilibrium price p1 is less than p0 and quantity q1 is less than q0. Notice that the direction of change in equilibrium price and quantity is same whenever there is a shift in demand curve. Having developed the general theory, we now consider some examples to understand how demand curve and the equilibrium quantity and price are affected in response to a change in some of the aforementioned factors which are also enlisted in Chapter 2. More specifically, we would analyse the impact of increase in consumers  income and an increase in the number of consumers Suppose due to a hike in the salaries of the consumers, their incomes increase. How would it affect equilibrium? With an increase in income, consumers are able to spend more money on some goods. But recall from Chapter 2 that the consumers will spend less on an inferior good with increase in income whereas for a normal good, with prices of all commodities and tastes and preferences of the consumers held constant, we would expect the demand for the good to increase at each price as a result of which the market demand curve will shift rightward. Here we consider the example of a normal good like clothes, the demand for which increases with increase in income of consumers, thereby causing a rightward shift in the demand curve. However, this income increase does not have any impact on Shifts in Demand. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in demand to the right, the new equilibrium is at G as shown in panel (a) and due to the leftward shift, the new equilibrium is at F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift the equilibrium quantity and price increase whereas with leftward shift, equilibrium quantity and price decrease. Now, suppose due to some reason, the market supply curve shifts leftward to SS2 with the demand curve remaining unchanged, as shown in panel (a). Because of the shift, at the prevailing price, p0, there will be excess demand equal to q'' qo in the market. Some consumers who are unable to obtain the good will be willing to pay higher prices and the market price tends to increase. The new equilibrium is attained at point G where the supply curve SS2 intersects the demand curve DD0 such that q2 quantity will be bought and sold at price p2. Similarly, when supply curve shifts rightward, as shown in panel (b), at p0 there will be supply excess of Shifts in Supply. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in supply curve to the left, the new equilibrium point is G as shown in panel (a) and due to the rightward shift the new equilibrium point is F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift, the equilibrium quantity increases and price decreases whereas with leftward shift,equilibrium quantity decreases and the supply curve, which shifts only due to some changes in the factors relating to technology or cost of production of the firms. Thus, the supply curve remains unchanged. In the Figure 5.2 (a), this is shown by a shift in the demand curve from DD0 to DD2 but the supply curve remains unchanged at SS0. From the figure, it is clear that at the new equilibrium, the price of clothes is higher and the quantity demanded and sold is also higher. Now let us turn to another example. Suppose due to some reason, there is increase in the number of consumers in the market for clothes. As the number of consumers increases, other factors remaining unchanged, at each price, more clothes will be demanded. Thus, the demand curve will shift rightwards. But this increase in the number of consumers does not have any impact on the supply curve since the supply curve may shift only due to changes in the parameters relating to firms  behaviour or with an increase in the number of firms, as stated in Chapter 4. This case again can be illustrated through Figure 5.2(a) in which the demand curve DD0 shifts rightward to DD2, the supply curve remaining unchanged at SS0. The figure clearly shows that compared to the old equilibrium point E, at point G which is the new equilibrium point, there is an increase in both price and quantity demanded and supplied. In Figure 5.3, we show the impact of a shift in supply curve on the equilibrium price and quantity. Suppose, initially, the market is in equilibrium at point E where the market demand curve DD0 intersects the market supply curve SS0 such that the equilibrium price is p0 and the equilibrium quantity is q0. goods  equal to q0 q '. In response to this excess supply, some firms will reduce their price and the new equilibrium will be attained at F where the supply curve SS1 intersects the demand curve DD0 such that the new market price is p1 at which q1 quantity is bought and sold. Notice the directions of change in price and quantity are opposite whenever there is a shift in supply curve. Now with this understanding, we can analyse the behaviour of equilibrium price and quantity when various aspects of the market change. Here, we will consider the effect of an increase in input price and an increase in number of firms on equilibrium. Let us consider a situation where all other things remaining constant, there is an increase in the price of an input used in the production of a commodity. This will increase the marginal cost of production of the firms using this input. Therefore, at each price, the market supply will be less than before. Hence, the supply curve shifts leftward. In the Figure 5.3(a), this is shown by a shift in the supply curve from SS0 to SS2. But this increase in input price has no impact on the demand of the consumers since it does not depend on the input prices directly. Therefore, the demand curve remains unchanged. In Figure 5.3(a), this is shown by the demand curve remaining unchanged at DD0. As a result, compared to the old equilibrium, now the market price rises and quantity Let us discuss the impact of an increase in the number of firms. Since at each price now more firms will supply the commodity, the supply curve shifts to the right but it does not have any effect on the demand curve. This example can be illustrated by Figure 5.3(b) where the supply curve shifts from SS0 to SS1 whereas the demand curve remains unchanged at DD0. From the figure, we can say that there will be a decrease in price of the commodity and increase in the quantity produced compared to the initial situation. Simultaneous Shifts of Demand and Supply What happens when both demand and supply curves shift simultaneously? The simultaneous shifts can happen in four possible ways: (i) Both supply and demand curves shift rightwards. (ii) Both supply and demand curves shift leftwards. (iii) Supply curve shifts leftward and demand curve shifts rightward. (iv) Supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward. The impact on equilibrium price and quantity in all the four cases are given in Table 5.1. Each row of the table describes the direction in which the equilibrium price and quantity will change for each possible combination of the simultaneous shifts in demand and supply curves. For instance, from the second row of the table, we see that due to a rightward shift in both demand and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases invariably but the equilibrium price may either increase, decrease or remain unchanged. The actual direction in which the price will change will depend on the magnitude of the shifts. Check this yourself by varying the magnitude of shifts for this particular case. In the first two cases which are shown in the first two rows of the table, the impact on equilibrium quantity is unambiguous but the equilibrium price may change, if at all, in either direction depending on the magnitudes of shifts. In the next two cases, shown in the last two rows of the table, the effect on price is unambiguous whereas effect on quantity depends on the magnitude of shifts in the two curves. Here we give diagrammatic representations for case (ii) and case (iii) in Figure 5.4 and leave the rest as exercises for the readers. Shift in Demand Shift in Supply Table 5.1:  Impact of Simultaneous Shifts on Equilibrium Simultaneous Shifts in Demand and Supply. Initially, the equilibrium is at E where the demand curve DD0 and supply curve SS0 intersect. In panel (a), both the supply and the demand curves shift rightward leaving price unchanged but a higher equilibrium quantity. In panel (b), the supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward leaving quantity unchanged but a lower equilibrium price. In the Figure 5.4(a), it can be seen that due to rightward shifts in both demand and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases whereas the equilibrium price remains unchanged, and in Figure 5.4(b), equilibrium quantity remains the same whereas price decreases due to a leftward shift in demand curve and a rightward shift in supply curve. 5.1.2 Market Equilibrium: Free Entry and Exit In the last section, the market equilibrium was studied under the assumption that there is a fixed number of firms. In this section, we will study market equilibrium when firms can enter and exit the market freely. Here, for simplicity, we assume that all the firms in the market are identical. What is the implication of the entry and exit assumption? This assumption implies that in equilibrium no firm earns supernormal profit or incurs loss by remaining in production; in other words, the equilibrium price will be equal to the minimum average cost of the firms. To see why it is so, suppose, at the prevailing market price, each firm is earning supernormal profit. The possibility of earning supernormal profit will attract some new firms. As new firms enter the market supply curve shifts rightward. However, demand remains unchanged. This causes market price to fall. As prices fall, supernormal profits are eventually wiped out. At this point, with all firms in the market earning normal profit, no more firms will have incentive to enter. Similarly, if the firms are earning less than normal profit at the prevailing price, some firms will exit which will lead to an increase in price, and with sufficient number of firms, the profits of each firm will increase to the level of normal profit. At this point, no more firm will want to leave since they will be earning normal profit here. Thus, with free entry and exit, each firm will always earn normal profit at the prevailing market price. Recall from the previous chapter that the firms will earn supernormal profit so long as the price is greater than the minimum average cost and at prices less than minimum average cost, they will earn less than normal profit. Therefore, at prices greater than the minimum average cost, new firms will enter, and at prices below minimum average cost, existing firms will start exiting. At the price level equal to the minimum average cost of the firms, each firm will earn normal profit so that no new firm will be attracted to enter the market. Also the existing firms will not leave the market since they are not incurring any loss by producing at this point. So, this price will prevail in the market. Therefore, free entry and exit of the firms imply that the market price will always be equal to the minimum average cost, that is p = min AC From the above, it follows that the equilibrium price will be equal to the minimum average cost of the firms. In equilibrium, the quantity supplied will be determined by the market demand at that price so that they are equal. Graphically, this is shown in Figure 5.5 where the market will be in equilibrium at point E at which the demand curve DD intersects the p0 = min AC line such that the market price is p0 and the total quantity demanded and supplied is equal to q0. At p0 = min AC each firm supplies same amount of output, Free for all Price Determination with Free Entry and Exit. With free entry and exit in a perfectly competitive market, the equilibrium price is always equal to min AC and the equilibrium quantity is determined at the intersection of the market demand curve DD with the price line p = min AC. say q0f. Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms in the market is equal to the number of firms required to supply q0 output at p0, each in turn supplying q0f amount at that price. If we denote the equilibrium number of firms by n0, then To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more clearly, let us look at the following example. Consider the example of a market for wheat such that the demand curve for wheat is given as follows qD = 200   p for 0   p   200 for p > 200 Assume that the market consists of identical firms. The supply curve of a single firm is given by = 10 + p for p   20 for 0   p < 20 The free entry and exit of firms would mean that the firms will never produce below minimum average cost because otherwise they will incur loss from production in which case they will exit the market. As we know, with free entry and exit, the market will be in equilibrium at a price which equals the minimum average cost of the firms. Therefore, the equilibrium price is p0 = 20 At this price, market will supply that quantity which is equal to the market demand. Therefore, from the demand curve, we get the equilibrium quantity: q0 = 200   20 = 180 Also at p0 = 20, each firm supplies q0f = 10 + 20 = 30 Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms is 30  = 6 Thus, with free entry and exit, the equilibrium price, quantity and number of firms are Rs 20, 180 kg and 6 respectively. Shifts in Demand Let us examine the impact of shift in demand on equilibrium price and quantity when the firms can freely enter and exit the market. From the previous section, we know that free entry and exit of the firms would imply that under all circumstances equilibrium price will be equal to the minimum average cost of the existing firms. Under this condition, even if the market demand curve shifts in either direction, at the new equilibrium, the market will supply the desired quantity at the same price. In Figure 5.6, DD0 is the market demand curve which tells us how much quantity will be demanded by the consumers at different prices and p0 denotes the price which is equal to the minimum average cost of the firms. The initial equilibrium is at point E where the demand curve DD0 cuts the p0 = minAC line and the total quantity demanded and supplied is q0. The equilibrium number of firms is n0 in this situation. Now suppose the demand curve shifts to the right for some reason. At p0 there will be excess demand for the commodity. Some dissatisfied consumers will be willing to pay higher price for the commodity, so the price tends to rise. This gives rise to a possibility of earning supernormal profit which will attract new firms to the market. The entry of these new firms will eventually wipe out the supernormal profit and the price will again reach p0. Now higher quantity will be supplied at the same price. From the panel (a), we can see that the new demand curve DD1 intersects the p0 = minAC line at point F such that the new equilibrium will be (p0, q1) where q1 is greater than q0. The new equilibrium number of firms n1 is greater than n0 because of the entry of new firms. Similarly, for a leftward shift of the demand curve to DD2, there will be Shifts in Demand. Initially, the demand curve was DD0, the equilibrium quantity and price were q0 and p0 respectively. With rightward shift of the demand curve to DD1, as shown in panel (a), the equilibrium quantity increases and with leftward shift of the demand curve to DD2, as shown in panel (b), the equilibrium quantity decreases. In both the cases, the equilibrium price remains unchanged at p0. excess supply at the price p0. In response to this excess supply, some firms, which will be unable to sell their desired quantity at p0, will wish to lower their price. The price tends to decrease which will lead to the exit of some of the existing firms and the price will again reach p0. Therefore, in the new equilibrium, less quantity will be supplied which will be equal to the reduced demand at that price. This is shown in panel (b) where due to the shift of demand curve from DD0 to DD2, quantity demanded and supplied will decrease to q2 whereas the price will remain unchanged at p0. Here, the equilibrium number of firms, n2 is less than n0 due to the exit of some existing firms. Thus, due to a shift in demand rightwards (leftwards), the equilibrium quantity and number of firms will increase (decrease) whereas the equilibrium price will remain unchanged. Here, we should note that with free entry and exit, shift in demand has a larger effect on quantity than it does with the fixed number of firms. But unlike with fixed number of firms, here, we do not have any effect on equilibrium price at all. In this section, we try to understand how the supply-demand analysis can be applied. In particular, we look at two examples of government intervention in the form of price control. Often, it becomes necessary for the government to regulate the prices of certain goods and services when their prices are either too high or too low in comparison to the desired levels. We will analyse these issues within the framework of perfect competition to look at what impact these regulations have on the market for 5.2.1 Price Ceiling It is not very uncommon to come across instances where government fixes a maximum allowable price for certain goods. The government-imposed upper limit on the price of a good or service is called price ceiling. Price ceiling is generally imposed on necessary items like wheat, rice, kerosene, sugar and it is fixed below the market-determined price since at the market-determined price some section of the population will not be able to afford these goods. Let us examine the effects of price ceiling on market equilibrium through the example of market for wheat. Figure 5.7 shows the market supply curve SS and the market demand curve DD for wheat. The equilibrium price and quantity of wheat are p* and q* respectively. When the government imposes price ceiling p which is lower than the equilibrium price level, there will be an excess demand for wheat in the market at that price. The consumers demand qc kilograms of wheat whereas  the  firms q '  kilograms. Hence, though the intention of the government was to help the consumers, it could end up creating shortage of wheat. How is the quantity of wheat (q'c) then distributed among the consumers? One way of doing this is to distribute it to everyone, through a system of rationing. Ration coupons are issued to the consumers so that no individual can buy more than a certain amount of wheat and this stipulated amount of wheat is sold through ration shops which are also called fair price shops. Effect of Price Ceiling in Wheat Market. The equilibrium price and quantity are p* and q* respectively. Imposition of price ceiling at pc gives rise to excess demand in the wheat market. Effect of Price Floor on the Market for Goods. The market equilibrium is at (p*, q*). Imposition of price floor at pf gives rise to an excess supply. In general, price ceiling accompanied by rationing of the goods may have the following adverse consequences on the consumers: (a) Each consumer has to stand in long queues to buy the good from ration shops. (b) Since all consumers will not be satisfied by the quantity of the goods that they get from the fair price shop, some of them will be willing to pay higher price for it. This may result in the creation of black market. 5.2.2 Price Floor For certain goods and services, fall in price below a particular level is not desirable and hence the government sets floors or minimum prices for these goods and services. The government- imposed lower limit on the price that may be charged for a particular good or service is called price floor. Most well-known examples of imposition of price floor are agricultural price support programmes and the minimum wage legislation. Through an agricultural price government imposes a lower limit on the purchase price for some of the agricultural goods and the floor is normally set at a level higher than the market-determined price for these goods. Similarly, through the minimum wage legislation, the government ensures that the wage rate of the labourers does not fall below a particular level and here again the minimum wage rate is set above the equilibrium wage rate. Figure 5.8 shows the market supply and the market demand curve for a commodity on which price floor is imposed. The market equilibrium here would occur at price p* and quantity q*. But when the government imposes a floor higher than the equilibrium price at pf, the market demand is qf whereas the firms want to supply q  f, thereby leading to an excess supply in the market equal to qf q  In the case of agricultural support, to prevent price from falling because of excess supply, government needs to buy the surplus at the predetermined price. In a perfectly competitive market, equilibrium occurs where market demand equals market supply. The equilibrium price and quantity are determined at the intersection of the market demand and market supply curves when there is fixed number of firms. Each firm employs labour upto the point where the marginal revenue product of labour equals the wage rate. With supply curve remaining unchanged when demand curve shifts rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and equilibrium price increases (decreases) with fixed number of firms. Marginal revenue product of labour Value of marginal product of labour Price ceiling, Price floor 1. Explain market equilibrium. 2. When do we say there is excess demand for a commodity in the market? 3. When do we say there is excess supply for a commodity in the market? 4. What will happen if the price prevailing in the market is (i) above the equilibrium price? (ii) below the equilibrium price? 5. Explain how price is determined in a perfectly competitive market with fixed number of firms. 6. Suppose the price at which equilibrium is attained in exercise 5 is above the minimum average cost of the firms constituting the market. Now if we allow for free entry and exit of firms, how will the market price adjust to it? 7. At what level of price do the firms in a perfectly competitive market supply when free entry and exit is allowed in the market? How is equilibrium quantity determined in such a market? 8. How is the equilibrium number of firms determined in a market where entry and exit is permitted? 9. How are equilibrium price and quantity affected when income of the consumers 10. Using supply and demand curves, show how an increase in the price of shoes affects the price of a pair of socks and the number of pairs of socks bought and sold. With demand curve remaining unchanged when supply curve shifts rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and equilibrium price decreases (increases) with fixed number of firms. When both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction, the effect on equilibrium quantity can be unambiguously determined whereas the effect on equilibrium price depends on the magnitude of the shifts. When demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions, the effect on equilibrium price can be unambiguously determined whereas the effect on equilibrium quantity depends on the magnitude of the shifts. In a perfectly competitive market with identical firms if the firms can enter and exit the market freely, the equilibrium price is always equal to minimum average cost of the firms. With free entry and exit, the shift in demand has no impact on equilibrium price but changes the equilibrium quantity and number of firms in the same direction as the change in demand. In comparison to a market with fixed number of firms, the impact of a shift in demand curve on equilibrium quantity is more pronounced in a market with free entry and exit. Imposition of price ceiling below the equilibrium price leads to an excess demand. Imposition of price floor above the equilibrium price leads to an excess supply. 11. How will a change in price of coffee affect the equilibrium price of tea? Explain the effect on equilibrium quantity also through a diagram. 12. How do the equilibrium price and quantity of a commodity change when price of input used in its production changes? 13. If the price of a substitute(Y) of good X increases, what impact does it have on the equilibrium price and quantity of good X? 14. Compare the effect of shift in demand curve on the equilibrium when the number of firms in the market is fixed with the situation when entry-exit is permitted. 15. Explain through a diagram the effect of a rightward shift of both the demand and supply curves on equilibrium price and quantity. 16. How are the equilibrium price and quantity affected when (a) both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction? (b) demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions? 17. In what respect do the supply and demand curves in the labour market differ from those in the goods market? 18. How is the optimal amount of labour determined in a perfectly competitive market? 19. How is the wage rate determined in a perfectly competitive labour market? 20. Can you think of any commodity on which price ceiling is imposed in India? What may be the consequence of price-ceiling? 21. A shift in demand curve has a larger effect on price and smaller effect on quantity when the number of firms is fixed compared to the situation when free entry and exit is permitted. Explain. 22. Suppose the demand and supply curve of commodity X in a perfectly competitive market are given by: qD = 700   p qS = 500 + 3p for p   15 = 0 for 0   p < 15 Assume that the market consists of identical firms. Identify the reason behind the market supply of commodity X being zero at any price less than Rs 15. What will be the equilibrium price for this commodity? At equilibrium, what quantity of X will be produced? 23. Considering the same demand curve as in exercise 22, now let us allow for free entry and exit of the firms producing commodity X. Also assume the market consists of identical firms producing commodity X. Let the supply curve of a single firm be explained as f = 8 + 3p for p   20 for 0   p < 20 (a) What is the significance of p = 20? (b) At what price will the market for X be in equilibrium? State the reason for (c) Calculate the equilibrium quantity and number of firms. 24. Suppose the demand and supply curves of salt are given by: qD = 1,000   p qS = 700 + 2p (a) Find the equilibrium price and quantity. (b) Now suppose that the price of an input used to produce salt has increased so that the new supply curve is qS = 400 + 2p How does the equilibrium price and quantity change? Does the change conform to your expectation? (c) Suppose the government has imposed a tax of Rs 3 per unit of sale of salt. How does it affect the equilibrium price and quantity? 25. Suppose the market determined rent for apartments is too high for common people to afford. If the government comes forward to help those seeking apartments on rent by imposing control on rent, what impact will it have on the market for apartments? Average cost Total cost per unit of output. Average fixed cost Total fixed cost per unit of output. Average product Output per unit of the variable input. Average revenue Total revenue per unit of output. Average variable cost Total variable cost per unit of output. Break-even point is the point on the supply curve at which a firm earns normal profit. Budget line consists of all bundles which cost exactly equal to the Budget set is the collection of all bundles that the consumer can buy with her income at the prevailing market prices. Constant returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by the same proportion. Cost function For every level of output, it shows the minimum cost for the firm. Decreasing returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by less than the proportion. Demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand function. It gives the quantity demanded by the consumer at each price. Demand function A consumer s demand function for a good gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its price when the other things remain unchanged. Duopoly is a market with just two firms. Equilibrium is a situation where the plans of all consumers and firms in the market match. Excess demand If at a price market, demand exceeds market supply, it is said that excess demand exists in the market at that price. Excess supply If at a price market, supply is greater than market demand, it is said that there is excess supply in the market at that Firm s supply curve shows the levels of output that a profit- maximising firm will choose to produce at different values of the Fixed input An input which cannot be varied in the short run is called a fixed input. Income effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when the purchasing power changes consequent upon a change in the price of the good is called the Increasing returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by more than Indifference curve is the locus of all points among which the consumer is indifferent. Inferior good A good for which the demand decreases with increase in the income of the consumer is called an inferior good. Isoquant is the set of all possible combinations of the two inputs that yield the same maximum possible level of output. Law of demand If a consumer s demand for a good moves in the same direction as the consumer s income, the consumer s demand for that good must be inversely related to the price of the good. Law of diminishing marginal product If we keep increasing the employment of an input with other inputs fixed then eventually a point will be reached after which the marginal product of that input will start falling. Law of variable proportions The marginal product of a factor input initially rises with its employment level when the level of employment of the input is low. But after reaching a certain level of employment, it starts falling. Long run refers to a time period in which all factors of production can Marginal cost Change in total cost per unit of change in output. Marginal product Change in output per unit of change in the input when all other inputs are held constant. Marginal revenue Change in total revenue per unit change in sale of output. Marginal revenue product(MRP) of a factor Marginal Revenue times Marginal Product of the factor. Market supply curve shows the output levels that firms in the market produce in aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price. Monopolistic competition is a market structure where there exit a very large number of sellers selling differentiated but substitutable products. Monopoly A market structure in which there is a single seller and there are sufficient restrictions to prevent any other seller from entering the market. Monotonic preferences A consumer s preferences are monotonic if and only if between any two bundles, the consumer prefers the bundle which has more of at least one of the goods and no less of the other good as compared to the other bundle. Normal good A good for which the demand increases with increase in the income of the consumer is called a normal good. Normal profit The profit level that is just enough to cover the explicit costs and opportunity costs of the firm is called the normal profit. Oligopoly A market consisting of more than one (but few) sellers is called a oligopoly. Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity. Perfect competition A market environment wherein (i) all firms in the market produce the same good and (ii) buyers and sellers are price-takers. Price ceiling The government-imposed upper limit on the price of a good or service is called price ceiling. Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price. Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied due to a one per cent change in the market price of the good. Price floor The government-imposed lower limit on the price that may be charged for a particular good or service is called price floor. Price line is a horizontal straight line that shows the relationship between market price and a firm s output level. Production function shows the maximum quantity of output that can be produced by using different combinations of the inputs. Profit is the difference between a firm s total revenue and its total cost of production. Short run refers to a time period in which some factors of production cannot be Shut down point In the short run, it is the minimum point of AVC curve and in the long run, it is the minimum point of LRAC curve. Substitution effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when its price changes and the consumer s income is adjusted so that she can just buy the bundle that she was buying before the price change is called the substitution effect. Super-normal profit Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is called the super-normal profit. Total cost is the sum of total fixed cost and total variable cost. Total fixed cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ fixed inputs is called the total Total physical product Same as the total product. Total product If we vary a single input keeping all other inputs constant, then for different levels of employment of that input we get different levels of output from the production function. This relationship between the variable input and output is referred to as total product. Total return Same as the total product. Total revenue is equal to the market price of the good multiplied by the quantity of the good sold by a firm. Total revenue curve shows the relationship between firm s total revenue and firm s Total variable cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ variable inputs is called the total variable cost. Value of marginal product (VMP) of a factor Price times Marginal Product of Variable input An input the amount of which can be varied.


=== Class6_Economics ===

9   Family and Community 1.	 Why is the family unit 2.	 What is a community and what is its role? Almost all of us live in a family. The family is the fundamental and most ancient unit of any society. In Indian society today, there are several types of families   from joint families to nuclear families. A joint family has several generations living together   grandparents, parents, uncles and aunts, Love and dharma are the flower and fruit of family life. Examples of joint families Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy brothers, sisters and cousins. A nuclear family, on the other hand, is limited to a couple and their children, and sometimes one parent and children. What types of families do you see in your neighbourhood? List the type with the number of households for each type. What types are more frequent? Why do you think this is so? As a class activity, compare with your classmates  findings In English, there are not many terms to describe family relationships; we saw some of them in the first paragraph. Indian languages have many more terms. For example, in Hindi there is bua, tau, tai, chacha, mausi, nana, nani, and many more. Some languages, such as Tamil, also have different terms for elder brother / sister or younger brother / sister. But what is the word for  cousin  in an Indian language? In most Indian languages, you will find that there is no such word! That is because cousins are only  brothers  and  sisters. This emphasises the deep bonds among all the children in the family. Examples of nuclear families 9   Family and Community Make a list of all the members of your family you can think of, including a few distant relatives. List their terms in your mother tongue or regional language and try to find the equivalent in English. Two examples are below for Hindi: Description / term in English mother's brother s daughter (cousin) (among other possible father's younger brother (uncle) Notice how, quite often, a single word in your mother tongue or regional language requires several words in English to give a precise definition. Roles and Responsibilities Relationships among family members are based on love, care, cooperation and interdependence.  Cooperation  means  working together. Each member of the family has a role and responsibility towards other members. For instance, parents are responsible for raising their children to become happy individuals and responsible members of the society. But also, as children grow up, they take on more responsibilities in the home to help other family members   whether parents or a sister or a brother, etc. Through daily practice, children learn to participate in the life of the household. In many homes, children also learn some of the traditions and practices their family has been following for Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Answer these questions and compare your answers with a Who in your family decides what is to be bought from Who cooks food in your home? Who is the oldest person in your family? Who cleans the floor in your home? Who washes utensils in your house? Who helps you to do your homework? Following our dharma, or doing our duty, has been an important principle of Indian culture. The family is also a  school, where children learn important values such as ahimsa, d na (giving), sev  (service) and ty ga (sacrifice). Individuals in the family often give up their own needs to take care of the family s needs. Let us see one such story. Shalini lives with her family in a town in Kerala. Her father runs a small business and her mother is a teacher in a nearby school. Shalini has a younger brother. Her grandmother, Acchamma 9   Family and Community (father s mother), Chittappa (father s brother or paternal uncle) and her Chitti (aunt or uncle s wife) live with them. They have a daughter, Shalini s cousin, who she calls Chinni. Shalini s uncle has just lost his job and her aunt is a homemaker. The whole family was preparing for the festival of Onam. Acchamma told Shalini s father that his brother was having financial difficulties, so they were not able to buy new clothes for the festival. When Shalini s parents took her and her brother shopping, they bought new clothes not only for themselves, but also for Chittappa, Chitti and Chinni. As a result, Shalini did not get the silk dress she had expected; she had to settle for a simple cotton one. Acchamma explained to Shalini that this is how families support each other and share what they have. Shalini did not mind her simpler dress. She was happy that everyone could get some new clothes. Draw a simple tree of this family of seven members. Why do you think Shalini s parents bought clothes What would you have done if you were in Shalini s place? That story was set in Kerala. Let us now travel northeast, to a village in Meghalaya. My name is Tenzing. I love the mountains we live in, though life is sometimes hard. My father runs a small grocery store. After my mother became busy in a local handicraft wood carvings and other items for sale to tourists, my father joined in cleaning the house, taking care of our small vegetable garden Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy and other household chores. Often, he helps my grandmother prepare food for us all. Grandmother always has all sorts of interesting stories to tell me, with humour and wisdom; no one seems to understand people better than her! Grandfather helps me with my homework and takes me to the school bus stop. He is also actively involved in social work in our colony and is always offering his help to others. For example, when there is a power failure in our area, he goes and registers a complaint at the nearby office. When our neighbours  house got damaged in a storm, he collected some money from the whole neighbourhood to help with We are lucky that my parents can take care of our basic necessities like food and clothing. When any special expenses come up, I have often seen that they discuss them together. Mother says that we should always try to save some money for any unexpected needs that may arise in the THINK ABOUT IT Why does Tenzing s father consult his wife for special How do you feel about his participation in household What roles do the grandparents fulfil? 9   Family and Community Create a story of a family somewhere in India, where we see some family values practised. Share it with your class either through writing or drawing. Stage a small drama with all your classmates around two or three families. The play you write could include some challenging situations that the families faced, and show how they are resolved. In the stories of Shalini and Tenzing, we see examples of joint families. What do you think are the aspects of modern living that make some couples opt for a nuclear family (i.e., living apart from older generations or other relatives)? What could be some advantages as well as disadvantages of the two kinds of families? Families are connected not only within themselves, but also with other families and the people around them. Such a group of connected people may be called a  community  (there are other meanings for  community, depending on the context). Members of a community come together for various reasons, like celebrating festivals and organising feasts, weddings and other events. In some villages, people come together to support each other with agricultural practices like land preparation, sowing and harvesting. Over time, communities often agreed upon some practices on the use of shared natural wealth and resources such as water, grazing lands and forest produce. This is the case with many tribal communities.  To some extent, this remains the case in village communities in rural India today. Such practices   we may call them  rules, though they were rarely written down   have provided communities a secure access to resources. But it also means that all families and Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy individuals within the community have specific duties to perform. Otherwise, the community will not function DON T MISS OUT Year after year, the region around the town of Jhabua, in Madhya Pradesh, suffered from an acute water crisis. Following their halma (see facing page) tradition of coming together to support any individual or family in times of crisis, the Bhil community decided to plant thousands of trees in hundreds of villages. The Bhils also dug many trenches to conserve rainwater and created other water harvesting structures. They did not get paid for this work but did it as their duty towards their community and the environment. In the halma tradition, the objective is to serve Mother Earth. In 2019, Shri Mahesh Sharma of the Shivganga movement was honoured with the Padma Shri award for his transformational work with the Bhil During the Chennai floods of 2015, roads turned to rivers and people could no longer move around. Almost all shops were closed and services interrupted. Many private groups, in particular spiritual and religious organisations, cooked large quantities of food and distributed it to people who needed it. There are many more such examples of people coming together to do something for the benefit of the community without expecting anything in return. Have you heard The real-life stories above illustrate community in a rural context. Community is also present in an urban context, although it may function a little differently. Let us see an example from another real-life story. 9   Family and Community Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy More than 20 years ago, in an area of Ahmedabad (Gujarat), Kamal Parmar, owner of a small auto-fabrication workshop, noticed a group of underprivileged children on the street. Some had dropped out of school, while others had never been to school. Kamal started giving them tuition from 5:30 to 9:30 pm every day, after his regular work hours. He also provided the kids with a free dinner. Soon, 150 children were attending those classes regularly and were deeply interested in the lessons! A few teachers from a local school noticed the classes and joined the teaching for a while. One of them observed,  These children don t get proper benches to sit on, have no  silence zone  classrooms and the vehicles passing by make lots of noise, yet they pay all their attention to what the teachers tell them. This touched my heart. The love and affection I got from them was unbelievable.  Some older children who were attending regular schools also joined as volunteers to teach in Kamal s classes. One of them remarked,  We went there to teach, instead we learnt a lot from them.  Discuss this story in your class. What kind of attitude towards the community does it reveal? What values get reflected in Kamal Parmar s Think about those underprivileged children. Do you think society has been unfair to them? 9   Family and Community What should society do to make sure that all children get access to education? New types of communities have also emerged in the last 30 or 40 years. Residents  Welfare Associations in many urban areas are examples of communities that make their own rules and regulations. Those could be rules about waste management, cleanliness of common areas, taking care of pets, and so on. People living in the community participate in making such rules and regulations. Communities are ultimately interdependent. The same Residents  Welfare Associations, for instance, will depend on the trading community for supplies and also on municipal workers to handle waste. In our complex societies, everyone depends on a number of other people and communities. Make a list of all people outside your family that are supporting you through their work in one way or another. We now understand that  community  is a flexible concept. A few more examples: A j ti, or a subdivision of it, is also often called a Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy A group of people of a particular religion, region, com- mon work or interest, especially a smaller group, may also be called a community; for instance,  Mumbai s  America s Indian community,  Kerala s scientific community,  our school s art community,  the village s farming community, and so on  The list is endless! In your school, you may be part of different communities   your class, of course, but also the sports community, the National Service Scheme, the National Cadet Corps, a science or drama club, etc. What types of communities are you part of? Is there a club that you are a part of in school? How does it Before we move on... Family is the foundation of human society. Ideally, members of a family support each other in their many duties and Community, a bigger unit, also implies that people do their best to support each other.  Community  can be defined in several ways and there are many kinds of community. Ultimately, communities are interdependent. Questions, activities and projects 1. 	 What are some of the rules you follow in your family and neighbourhood? Why are they important? 2. 	 Do you think some rules are unfair to a few people in the family or community? Why? 3. 	 Describe several situations that you have observed where community support makes a difference. You can draw or write about these. 13   The Value of Work The Value of Work When you are doing any work, do not think of anything beyond. Do it as worship, as the highest worship, and devote your whole life to it for the time being.   Swami Vivekananda What are the different types of activities that people engage in? What is their contribution to our everyday lives? Anu and Kabir were playing in the park when they saw their neighbour, Geeta Aunty, getting out of a taxi. She was returning home from work and was in her uniform. A pilot in the Indian Air Force, she is the pride of the whole town. Kabir, Aunty s uniform looks a lot like the one I saw at your house yesterday, but the colour That uniform on the hanger belongs to my grandfather. He retired from the Border Security Force and now spends his time... Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us... providing free Geography classes to the neighbourhood kids...... tending to our vegetable garden, and...... running errands for the My parents run a shop that sells uniforms and other Appa leaves early in the morning and Maa joins him in the shop after we leave for school. Maa is usually back by the time we return home from school. She also contributes to a voluntary group that teaches knitting to the women in Do you remember my elder brother Rohan? You met him when he came to pick me up from school. He is a software engineer and works in a company that makes computer applications. On the weekends he volunteers to teach computer skills to those who have joined the youth development programme of the nearby Wow, Anu, everyone around us does so many things every day! 13   The Value of Work What activities did the people in Anu s and Kabir s story engage in? Mention them in the table given below: Character in the are engaged in Different types of activities, like the ones discussed above, are divided into two groups or categories: economic activities and non-economic activities. Economic activities are those that involve money or are performed in exchange for money or money s worth for the parties involved. For example, a business person selling school bags in the market, a farmer selling produce in the market, a lawyer arguing a case and earning a fee, a truck driver transporting goods from one place to another, workers employed in a car manufacturing factory, etc. based on the Market: A place where people engage in the exchange of goods and services. People may exchange goods and services for other goods but in most markets these are exchanged for money. Fee: A payment made to a person or organisation in exchange for professional advice or services. For example, a fee paid to a doctor and a lawyer. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Non-economic activities are those that do not generate income or wealth but are done out of feelings like gratitude, love, care and respect. For instance, parents cooking food for the family or helping their children with schoolwork, youth taking care of the grandparents, family members helping in the renovation of the house, etc. Left to right, top to bottom: A business person selling school bags in the market Farmers selling their harvest in the market A lawyer arguing a case A truck driver transporting goods from one place to another Workers employed in a car Left to right: Parents cooking food for the family Mother helping her 13   The Value of Work empty column? Label this column  economic / non-economic activity. Now classify them according to the nature of In Anu s and Kabir s story, Geeta Aunty, the Air Force pilot, receives a salary. She serves the country and performs an economic activity too. Anu s brother, Rohan, works for a software company and is given a salary for it. Over the weekend, he also volunteers at the youth development programme of the nearby college, where he teaches computer skills to young adults. This is a non-economic THINK ABOUT IT When Kabir s grandfather voluntarily teaches the neighbourhood kids for free, is that an economic activity or a non-economic activity? How is it different from your teachers teaching you at school? Discuss with your classmates. What are some non-economic activities that are important to you and your family? Why are they Left to right: Youth taking care of the Family members helping in the renovation of the house Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Types of Economic Activities Kavya was excited to go to her aunt s house in the village of Kamlapur. On the way, she saw that a highway was being built near the village, and the construction site was abuzz with activity. Large machines, such as excavators and bulldozers, were being operated by dedicated technicians. This new highway promised to reduce the travel time to the nearest town from five hours to just two hours. Kavya thought that she would be able to visit her aunt more often once the highway was ready, since it would take less time to travel there. Happy with this thought, Kavya ran to greet her aunt and to eat the delicious jalebis that she had made. They were joined by Kavya s uncle, who had just returned home from work. He is a technician in a construction company and operates a bulldozer. He receives a monthly salary for his services. The next day, Kavya s aunt woke up early to finish her share of the household chores and left for work. She is 13   The Value of Work employed at the village post office and is paid a monthly salary. In the evening, after her office work, she also conducts online classes to help students prepare for school exams. She charges a weekly fee for these On the weekend, Kavya visited a local mango orchard with her aunt to have some There she saw Sahil, a farm labourer who was using a tractor to till a farmer s land nearby. He earns a daily wage for his efforts. He gets some payment for his work in cash, and the remaining part of the payment in the form of mangoes of equal value. The mangoes that he receives as a part of his work are called payment in kind. THINK ABOUT IT On your way from home to school today, can you recall the various economic activities that people are engaged in? In what ways do you think those people are paid? As we now understand, economic activities are those that have value in terms of money. Economic activities also add value at each stage of the process of transforming some- thing into another form. This is called value addition. made by the in kind: A Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Let us take the example of Kavya s father, Rajesh, to Rajesh is a carpenter who buys wood from a nearby market for  600 to make furniture. He uses special tools and other materials for building the Rajesh sells a chair for  1,000 each in the market. The wood for the chair costs  600. So, what is the remaining  400 ( 1,000    600) for? It is the monetary value of Rajesh s skill, time and effort, which went into making that chair. Rajesh has added value to the wood by turning it into furniture. From buying the wood to selling the chair, these activities involve payment. They are, therefore, a part of 13   The Value of Work Put a   against those activities/professions that you think create monetary value. Can you add two activities and examples of money related value creation to the empty rows at the end? The Importance of Non-Economic While non-economic activities may not involve money, the value they generate is important in our lives. Sev: selfless service We see sev  in many places such as temples, gurudwaras, mosques and churches. For instance, langars or community kitchens at gurudwaras serve food to every visitor for free. These practices foster a sense of satisfaction and gratitude Activity / Profession 3.  Farmers repairing their tractor 5.  Parents cooking dinner for their family 7.  Person taking care of a sick grandparent Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us for what we have, and they are also a way of contributing to society without expecting anything in return. Temple distributing prasa d to devotees Langar at the Golden Temple Swachh Bharat Abhiyan The strength of community The Swachh Bharat Abhiyan is based on the collective efforts of all Indian citizens to keep our surroundings clean. Individually, we keep our homes and surround- ings clean. People have also come together to clean up streets, roads, parks and other public places these efforts lead to a clean home, neighbourhood, society and nation. community participation is the celebration of Van Mahotsav (the festival of forests) in India to value of trees and the conservation 13   The Value of Work of forests. The initiative brings together members of the community for tree plantation drives. THINK ABOUT IT Many communities in India have similar practices that involve community participation. Can you identify a few from your area? We celebrate many festivals in India. During these festivals, people gather to organise all the various activities. They decorate the place together and share the food that they cook. Are these non-economic activities? Why do you think they still hold value? Can you identify community programmes that have been undertaken by your school or in your locality? What did you observe during these programmes? Before we move on... In this chapter, we learnt about economic and non- We also learnt about the value addition that economic We understood how non-economic activities contribute to social welfare, personal wellbeing and enhance the overall quality of life. Questions, activities and projects How are economic activities different from non-economic What kind of economic activities do people engage in? Illustrate with examples. There is great value attached to people who are engaged in community service activities. Comment on this statement. What are the various ways in which people are compensated for various economic activities? Give some Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 14   Economic Activities Around Us that can be in terms of The root of prosperity is economic activity, the lack of it brings material distress. The absence of fruitful economic activity endangers both current prosperity and future growth.   Kau ilya s Artha h stra In Chapter 13, we learnt about two types of activities   economic and non- economic. Activities that create monetary value are called economic activities. We also learnt about the importance of non-economic activities. To understand these activities better we will learn how economic activities are classified and what differentiates them in this chapter. How are economic activities What differentiates these activities to be grouped into How are the three sectors Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Over the decades, the number of economic activities has increased tremendously. For example, earlier most people were involved in activities such as agriculture, livestock rearing, production of tools, pottery and weaving cloth. As societies progressed, the number of economic activities through which people earn their livelihoods increased Today, there are diverse economic activities such as manufacturing computers, mobile phones and drones; working in banks, schools and hotels; driving various types of vehicles for transportation; making furniture; tailoring clothes using machines; creating software; repairing refrigerators and washing machines; etc. Classifying all these activities helps us to understand how they function and the links they have with each other. The Classification of Economic Activities into Economic Sectors Some economic activities share similar characteristics and based on this, they can be grouped together or classified into broader groups called economic sectors. The three main types of economic sectors are primary, secondary and tertiary economic sectors. The illustration on the facing page maps out the broad activities under these categories. A. Primary activities Those economic activities in which people are directly dependent on nature to produce goods are known as primary activities or primary sector economic activities. The group of activities that involves extraction of raw materials directly from nature such as farming, fishing, forestry, etc. of a nation. 14   Economic Activities Around Us Classification of economic activities into economic sectors Trade and logistics Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us For example, work involving cultivation of grains and vegetables from agricultural farms, collecting wood from the forests, extracting coal from mines, fish from fisheries, eggs from poultry farms, etc., are all primary sector The most common primary activities are agriculture, mining, fishing, raising livestock, forestry, etc. Below are some of the types of activities within the primary sectors. Fish farming (fishery) 14   Economic Activities Around Us THINK ABOUT IT Can you think of any primary activities that you may have seen in the past? What are the natural resources used in these activities? Name two of them and discuss your experiences with your classmates. B. Secondary activities Economic activities in which people are dependent on outputs of the primary sector and transform them to produce goods are known as secondary activities or secondary sector economic activities. The secondary sector includes the construction of buildings, roads, etc., and providing utilities like water, electricity, gas and other such necessities. It also includes the manufacturing of products in factories and production units to process raw material from the primary sector into some other form that can be further sold or consumed. Some examples of secondary sector activities include the processing of grains obtained from agricultural fields to make flour in mills, extraction of oil from groundnut and processing of tea leaves to derive tea. Similarly, wood from the forest is converted into furniture and paper, cotton is used to make clothes, and steel from iron ore is used to make automobiles like cars, for sale or Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Furniture production unit DON T MISS OUT Now that we have seen some examples of secondary sector activities, can you name two more economic activities in the Types of Automobiles No. of units produced in India in 2022 Passenger vehicles like cars Commercial vehicles like trucks (Source: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, https://www.siam.in/statistics.aspx?mpgid=8&pgidtrail=13 ) 14   Economic Activities Around Us Services at restaurant The group of sectors, such as used for storing they are sold, used or rented out to shops. C. Tertiary activities All those economic activities that provide support to people involved in primary and secondary activities are called tertiary activities or tertiary sector economic activities. These include services that we may not be able to see but which still play a very important role. For example, the driver of a truck transports grains and vegetables from the farm to a factory or the market. The fruit or vegetable vendors sell the farm produce to household consumers. Similarly, doctors, nurses, teachers, lawyers and pilots provide their services to those who need them. There are technicians who repair and service electronic items including mobile phones and televisions, mechanics who repair vehicles like cars and tractors, and electricians who ensure regular supply of electricity. Their services make our lives easier. Similarly, communication services through mobile and internet, software development, and services at hotels, restaurants, banks, schools, hospitals, airports, shops, warehouses, etc. are all examples of tertiary sector economic activities. This sector is also called the service sector. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Interdependence Among Sectors The three types of economic activities or economic sectors play an important role in the process of conversion of natural raw materials into finished products for final consumption. Let us go on an imaginary excursion to a village in Anand district of Gujarat to study an interesting example where we will understand how the three sectors are interconnected and support each other. Services at airports Dairy cooperative: from farm to plate These days, farmers in Gujarat greet the day with the clinking of milk pails and the happy moos of their best friends, their cows or buffaloes! Cows have a special place in the lives of the farmers and their families. The farmers milk the cows and sell their milk to the dairy nearby. At the end of the month, they get paid for the milk based on its quantity and quality. However, this was not the case about 50 years ago. This is the amazing story of a milk cooperative named Anand Milk Union Limited (AMUL). In the early 1940s, farmers in Anand district would sell milk to the neighbouring villages. 14   Economic Activities Around Us A group of needs in a They own the are taken by fee for this They would have to cycle or walk to nearby villages to sell the milk under scorching heat. As you know, milk spoils or curdles very fast in hot weather. The farmers had to sell the milk quickly before it could spoil. This was a lot of effort for the small amount of money they would earn. So, they depended on people called middlemen, who would buy the milk in bulk at meagre prices from the farmers and sell it in the market. Many times, the farmers felt cheated and harassed by the middlemen. approached Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a prominent national leader, with their problems. He advised them to form a cooperative to become independent and stop relying on the middlemen. As a cooperative, the farmers would be able to buy and sell milk as a group, taking care of the entire operation of milk collection, processing and distribution themselves. The farmers took Sardar Patel s advice. AMUL was set up in 1946 under the leadership of Tribhuvandas Patel (lawyer and freedom fighter) and Dr. Varghese Kurien (an engineer who was working at a dairy factory in Mumbai). Varghese Kurien (left) and Tribhuvandas Patel (right) Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us This initiative brought farmers, including women, together and gave them control over the production and sale of milk. The milk producers collectively made their own decisions on all matters such as production, pasteurisation and sale of milk. The tasks were shared by everyone, which helped raise their income gradually. They did not need the middlemen anymore and became like one big family! As more and more farmers began to see the benefits quantity of milk that was products out of it. They set up a factory in Anand, and began to produce butter and Today, the cooperative has a wide range of products made at many milk processing over India. Can you name a few? The products are then transported and sold in both small and large retail shops all over the country. In fact, they also export the products to several countries around the world. Is it not amazing? In this fascinating story, the farmers of this cooperative milk their cows to sell the milk later. This kind of economic activity is called a primary sector economic activity because the product (milk) is derived directly from a natural source A process by to a specific to kill harmful or group of to make a final sale of goods for use by and sold to 14   Economic Activities Around Us DON T MISS OUT Just like AMUL, there are many other milk cooperatives under brands such as Nandini from Karnataka, Mother Dairy from Delhi-NCR, Aavin from Tamil Nadu, Vijaya from Andhra Pradesh, Kevi from Nagaland, Sudha from Bihar, Verka from Punjab, etc. Can you name one cooperative around you that has helped groups like farmers, persons with disabilities, and women, to come together and has brought prosperity to their Milk is then processed and converted from one form (liquid) into another   milk powder, ghee, cheese, butter and many others in the factories. These economic activities  are called secondary sector economic activities. What does AMUL do with all the products it makes? It sells them in various places. AMUL uses lorries and trucks, as well as railway, air and shipping services, to transport its products. It has set up retail stores and supplies milk and milk products to other shops in towns, cities and villages all over Gujarat, as well as in different states across India. Here, transportation, trading and retail is a tertiary activity. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us With the help of the images below, let s see how the books you study are made. The images show the transformation of pulp (wooden fibre of a tree) into paper and, after printing, into textbooks. 14   Economic Activities Around Us None of the activities that were part of the process   from extracting pulp from the trees to making paper and finally producing the books would have been possible, had it not been for all three sectors working together. THINK ABOUT IT Observe the different stages of the process shown in Fig. 14.1 Label the pictures in the illustration shown in Fig. 14.1 on 1.   Primary sector 2.   Secondary sector 3.   Tertiary sector DON T MISS OUT These days, used paper is recycled to make new paper. Recycling just one tonne of paper saves 17 trees as well as 2.5 cubic metres of landfill space, where waste is dumped. It also takes 70 per cent less energy and water to recycle paper than to make new paper from wood pulp. What are the different ways through which we can judiciously use paper in the classrooms and offices of your school? What are the different ways through which we can judiciously use paper in the classrooms and offices of your school? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us List the economic activities in your neighbourhood and label them appropriately as primary, secondary or tertiary. Draw arrows to show how they are connected to each other. In what ways are they dependent on each other? What would happen if one of the activities ceased to exist? Before we move on... In this chapter, we learnt about the three sectors of economic The various examples and illustrations helped to understand the difference as well as the interdependence between the three types of economic activities or sectors   primary, secondary and tertiary. Questions, activities and projects What is the primary sector? How is it different from the secondary sector? Give two examples. How does the secondary sector depend on the tertiary sector? Illustrate with a few examples. Give an example of interdependence between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors. Show it using a


=== Class7_Economics ===

9   Family and Community 1.	 Why is the family unit 2.	 What is a community and what is its role? Almost all of us live in a family. The family is the fundamental and most ancient unit of any society. In Indian society today, there are several types of families   from joint families to nuclear families. A joint family has several generations living together   grandparents, parents, uncles and aunts, Love and dharma are the flower and fruit of family life. Examples of joint families Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy brothers, sisters and cousins. A nuclear family, on the other hand, is limited to a couple and their children, and sometimes one parent and children. What types of families do you see in your neighbourhood? List the type with the number of households for each type. What types are more frequent? Why do you think this is so? As a class activity, compare with your classmates  findings In English, there are not many terms to describe family relationships; we saw some of them in the first paragraph. Indian languages have many more terms. For example, in Hindi there is bua, tau, tai, chacha, mausi, nana, nani, and many more. Some languages, such as Tamil, also have different terms for elder brother / sister or younger brother / sister. But what is the word for  cousin  in an Indian language? In most Indian languages, you will find that there is no such word! That is because cousins are only  brothers  and  sisters. This emphasises the deep bonds among all the children in the family. Examples of nuclear families 9   Family and Community Make a list of all the members of your family you can think of, including a few distant relatives. List their terms in your mother tongue or regional language and try to find the equivalent in English. Two examples are below for Hindi: Description / term in English mother's brother s daughter (cousin) (among other possible father's younger brother (uncle) Notice how, quite often, a single word in your mother tongue or regional language requires several words in English to give a precise definition. Roles and Responsibilities Relationships among family members are based on love, care, cooperation and interdependence.  Cooperation  means  working together. Each member of the family has a role and responsibility towards other members. For instance, parents are responsible for raising their children to become happy individuals and responsible members of the society. But also, as children grow up, they take on more responsibilities in the home to help other family members   whether parents or a sister or a brother, etc. Through daily practice, children learn to participate in the life of the household. In many homes, children also learn some of the traditions and practices their family has been following for Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Answer these questions and compare your answers with a Who in your family decides what is to be bought from Who cooks food in your home? Who is the oldest person in your family? Who cleans the floor in your home? Who washes utensils in your house? Who helps you to do your homework? Following our dharma, or doing our duty, has been an important principle of Indian culture. The family is also a  school, where children learn important values such as ahimsa, d na (giving), sev  (service) and ty ga (sacrifice). Individuals in the family often give up their own needs to take care of the family s needs. Let us see one such story. Shalini lives with her family in a town in Kerala. Her father runs a small business and her mother is a teacher in a nearby school. Shalini has a younger brother. Her grandmother, Acchamma 9   Family and Community (father s mother), Chittappa (father s brother or paternal uncle) and her Chitti (aunt or uncle s wife) live with them. They have a daughter, Shalini s cousin, who she calls Chinni. Shalini s uncle has just lost his job and her aunt is a homemaker. The whole family was preparing for the festival of Onam. Acchamma told Shalini s father that his brother was having financial difficulties, so they were not able to buy new clothes for the festival. When Shalini s parents took her and her brother shopping, they bought new clothes not only for themselves, but also for Chittappa, Chitti and Chinni. As a result, Shalini did not get the silk dress she had expected; she had to settle for a simple cotton one. Acchamma explained to Shalini that this is how families support each other and share what they have. Shalini did not mind her simpler dress. She was happy that everyone could get some new clothes. Draw a simple tree of this family of seven members. Why do you think Shalini s parents bought clothes What would you have done if you were in Shalini s place? That story was set in Kerala. Let us now travel northeast, to a village in Meghalaya. My name is Tenzing. I love the mountains we live in, though life is sometimes hard. My father runs a small grocery store. After my mother became busy in a local handicraft wood carvings and other items for sale to tourists, my father joined in cleaning the house, taking care of our small vegetable garden Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy and other household chores. Often, he helps my grandmother prepare food for us all. Grandmother always has all sorts of interesting stories to tell me, with humour and wisdom; no one seems to understand people better than her! Grandfather helps me with my homework and takes me to the school bus stop. He is also actively involved in social work in our colony and is always offering his help to others. For example, when there is a power failure in our area, he goes and registers a complaint at the nearby office. When our neighbours  house got damaged in a storm, he collected some money from the whole neighbourhood to help with We are lucky that my parents can take care of our basic necessities like food and clothing. When any special expenses come up, I have often seen that they discuss them together. Mother says that we should always try to save some money for any unexpected needs that may arise in the THINK ABOUT IT Why does Tenzing s father consult his wife for special How do you feel about his participation in household What roles do the grandparents fulfil? 9   Family and Community Create a story of a family somewhere in India, where we see some family values practised. Share it with your class either through writing or drawing. Stage a small drama with all your classmates around two or three families. The play you write could include some challenging situations that the families faced, and show how they are resolved. In the stories of Shalini and Tenzing, we see examples of joint families. What do you think are the aspects of modern living that make some couples opt for a nuclear family (i.e., living apart from older generations or other relatives)? What could be some advantages as well as disadvantages of the two kinds of families? Families are connected not only within themselves, but also with other families and the people around them. Such a group of connected people may be called a  community  (there are other meanings for  community, depending on the context). Members of a community come together for various reasons, like celebrating festivals and organising feasts, weddings and other events. In some villages, people come together to support each other with agricultural practices like land preparation, sowing and harvesting. Over time, communities often agreed upon some practices on the use of shared natural wealth and resources such as water, grazing lands and forest produce. This is the case with many tribal communities.  To some extent, this remains the case in village communities in rural India today. Such practices   we may call them  rules, though they were rarely written down   have provided communities a secure access to resources. But it also means that all families and Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy individuals within the community have specific duties to perform. Otherwise, the community will not function DON T MISS OUT Year after year, the region around the town of Jhabua, in Madhya Pradesh, suffered from an acute water crisis. Following their halma (see facing page) tradition of coming together to support any individual or family in times of crisis, the Bhil community decided to plant thousands of trees in hundreds of villages. The Bhils also dug many trenches to conserve rainwater and created other water harvesting structures. They did not get paid for this work but did it as their duty towards their community and the environment. In the halma tradition, the objective is to serve Mother Earth. In 2019, Shri Mahesh Sharma of the Shivganga movement was honoured with the Padma Shri award for his transformational work with the Bhil During the Chennai floods of 2015, roads turned to rivers and people could no longer move around. Almost all shops were closed and services interrupted. Many private groups, in particular spiritual and religious organisations, cooked large quantities of food and distributed it to people who needed it. There are many more such examples of people coming together to do something for the benefit of the community without expecting anything in return. Have you heard The real-life stories above illustrate community in a rural context. Community is also present in an urban context, although it may function a little differently. Let us see an example from another real-life story. 9   Family and Community Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy More than 20 years ago, in an area of Ahmedabad (Gujarat), Kamal Parmar, owner of a small auto-fabrication workshop, noticed a group of underprivileged children on the street. Some had dropped out of school, while others had never been to school. Kamal started giving them tuition from 5:30 to 9:30 pm every day, after his regular work hours. He also provided the kids with a free dinner. Soon, 150 children were attending those classes regularly and were deeply interested in the lessons! A few teachers from a local school noticed the classes and joined the teaching for a while. One of them observed,  These children don t get proper benches to sit on, have no  silence zone  classrooms and the vehicles passing by make lots of noise, yet they pay all their attention to what the teachers tell them. This touched my heart. The love and affection I got from them was unbelievable.  Some older children who were attending regular schools also joined as volunteers to teach in Kamal s classes. One of them remarked,  We went there to teach, instead we learnt a lot from them.  Discuss this story in your class. What kind of attitude towards the community does it reveal? What values get reflected in Kamal Parmar s Think about those underprivileged children. Do you think society has been unfair to them? 9   Family and Community What should society do to make sure that all children get access to education? New types of communities have also emerged in the last 30 or 40 years. Residents  Welfare Associations in many urban areas are examples of communities that make their own rules and regulations. Those could be rules about waste management, cleanliness of common areas, taking care of pets, and so on. People living in the community participate in making such rules and regulations. Communities are ultimately interdependent. The same Residents  Welfare Associations, for instance, will depend on the trading community for supplies and also on municipal workers to handle waste. In our complex societies, everyone depends on a number of other people and communities. Make a list of all people outside your family that are supporting you through their work in one way or another. We now understand that  community  is a flexible concept. A few more examples: A j ti, or a subdivision of it, is also often called a Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy A group of people of a particular religion, region, com- mon work or interest, especially a smaller group, may also be called a community; for instance,  Mumbai s  America s Indian community,  Kerala s scientific community,  our school s art community,  the village s farming community, and so on  The list is endless! In your school, you may be part of different communities   your class, of course, but also the sports community, the National Service Scheme, the National Cadet Corps, a science or drama club, etc. What types of communities are you part of? Is there a club that you are a part of in school? How does it Before we move on... Family is the foundation of human society. Ideally, members of a family support each other in their many duties and Community, a bigger unit, also implies that people do their best to support each other.  Community  can be defined in several ways and there are many kinds of community. Ultimately, communities are interdependent. Questions, activities and projects 1. 	 What are some of the rules you follow in your family and neighbourhood? Why are they important? 2. 	 Do you think some rules are unfair to a few people in the family or community? Why? 3. 	 Describe several situations that you have observed where community support makes a difference. You can draw or write about these. 13   The Value of Work The Value of Work When you are doing any work, do not think of anything beyond. Do it as worship, as the highest worship, and devote your whole life to it for the time being.   Swami Vivekananda What are the different types of activities that people engage in? What is their contribution to our everyday lives? Anu and Kabir were playing in the park when they saw their neighbour, Geeta Aunty, getting out of a taxi. She was returning home from work and was in her uniform. A pilot in the Indian Air Force, she is the pride of the whole town. Kabir, Aunty s uniform looks a lot like the one I saw at your house yesterday, but the colour That uniform on the hanger belongs to my grandfather. He retired from the Border Security Force and now spends his time... Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us... providing free Geography classes to the neighbourhood kids...... tending to our vegetable garden, and...... running errands for the My parents run a shop that sells uniforms and other Appa leaves early in the morning and Maa joins him in the shop after we leave for school. Maa is usually back by the time we return home from school. She also contributes to a voluntary group that teaches knitting to the women in Do you remember my elder brother Rohan? You met him when he came to pick me up from school. He is a software engineer and works in a company that makes computer applications. On the weekends he volunteers to teach computer skills to those who have joined the youth development programme of the nearby Wow, Anu, everyone around us does so many things every day! 13   The Value of Work What activities did the people in Anu s and Kabir s story engage in? Mention them in the table given below: Character in the are engaged in Different types of activities, like the ones discussed above, are divided into two groups or categories: economic activities and non-economic activities. Economic activities are those that involve money or are performed in exchange for money or money s worth for the parties involved. For example, a business person selling school bags in the market, a farmer selling produce in the market, a lawyer arguing a case and earning a fee, a truck driver transporting goods from one place to another, workers employed in a car manufacturing factory, etc. based on the Market: A place where people engage in the exchange of goods and services. People may exchange goods and services for other goods but in most markets these are exchanged for money. Fee: A payment made to a person or organisation in exchange for professional advice or services. For example, a fee paid to a doctor and a lawyer. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Non-economic activities are those that do not generate income or wealth but are done out of feelings like gratitude, love, care and respect. For instance, parents cooking food for the family or helping their children with schoolwork, youth taking care of the grandparents, family members helping in the renovation of the house, etc. Left to right, top to bottom: A business person selling school bags in the market Farmers selling their harvest in the market A lawyer arguing a case A truck driver transporting goods from one place to another Workers employed in a car Left to right: Parents cooking food for the family Mother helping her 13   The Value of Work empty column? Label this column  economic / non-economic activity. Now classify them according to the nature of In Anu s and Kabir s story, Geeta Aunty, the Air Force pilot, receives a salary. She serves the country and performs an economic activity too. Anu s brother, Rohan, works for a software company and is given a salary for it. Over the weekend, he also volunteers at the youth development programme of the nearby college, where he teaches computer skills to young adults. This is a non-economic THINK ABOUT IT When Kabir s grandfather voluntarily teaches the neighbourhood kids for free, is that an economic activity or a non-economic activity? How is it different from your teachers teaching you at school? Discuss with your classmates. What are some non-economic activities that are important to you and your family? Why are they Left to right: Youth taking care of the Family members helping in the renovation of the house Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Types of Economic Activities Kavya was excited to go to her aunt s house in the village of Kamlapur. On the way, she saw that a highway was being built near the village, and the construction site was abuzz with activity. Large machines, such as excavators and bulldozers, were being operated by dedicated technicians. This new highway promised to reduce the travel time to the nearest town from five hours to just two hours. Kavya thought that she would be able to visit her aunt more often once the highway was ready, since it would take less time to travel there. Happy with this thought, Kavya ran to greet her aunt and to eat the delicious jalebis that she had made. They were joined by Kavya s uncle, who had just returned home from work. He is a technician in a construction company and operates a bulldozer. He receives a monthly salary for his services. The next day, Kavya s aunt woke up early to finish her share of the household chores and left for work. She is 13   The Value of Work employed at the village post office and is paid a monthly salary. In the evening, after her office work, she also conducts online classes to help students prepare for school exams. She charges a weekly fee for these On the weekend, Kavya visited a local mango orchard with her aunt to have some There she saw Sahil, a farm labourer who was using a tractor to till a farmer s land nearby. He earns a daily wage for his efforts. He gets some payment for his work in cash, and the remaining part of the payment in the form of mangoes of equal value. The mangoes that he receives as a part of his work are called payment in kind. THINK ABOUT IT On your way from home to school today, can you recall the various economic activities that people are engaged in? In what ways do you think those people are paid? As we now understand, economic activities are those that have value in terms of money. Economic activities also add value at each stage of the process of transforming some- thing into another form. This is called value addition. made by the in kind: A Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Let us take the example of Kavya s father, Rajesh, to Rajesh is a carpenter who buys wood from a nearby market for  600 to make furniture. He uses special tools and other materials for building the Rajesh sells a chair for  1,000 each in the market. The wood for the chair costs  600. So, what is the remaining  400 ( 1,000    600) for? It is the monetary value of Rajesh s skill, time and effort, which went into making that chair. Rajesh has added value to the wood by turning it into furniture. From buying the wood to selling the chair, these activities involve payment. They are, therefore, a part of 13   The Value of Work Put a   against those activities/professions that you think create monetary value. Can you add two activities and examples of money related value creation to the empty rows at the end? The Importance of Non-Economic While non-economic activities may not involve money, the value they generate is important in our lives. Sev: selfless service We see sev  in many places such as temples, gurudwaras, mosques and churches. For instance, langars or community kitchens at gurudwaras serve food to every visitor for free. These practices foster a sense of satisfaction and gratitude Activity / Profession 3.  Farmers repairing their tractor 5.  Parents cooking dinner for their family 7.  Person taking care of a sick grandparent Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us for what we have, and they are also a way of contributing to society without expecting anything in return. Temple distributing prasa d to devotees Langar at the Golden Temple Swachh Bharat Abhiyan The strength of community The Swachh Bharat Abhiyan is based on the collective efforts of all Indian citizens to keep our surroundings clean. Individually, we keep our homes and surround- ings clean. People have also come together to clean up streets, roads, parks and other public places these efforts lead to a clean home, neighbourhood, society and nation. community participation is the celebration of Van Mahotsav (the festival of forests) in India to value of trees and the conservation 13   The Value of Work of forests. The initiative brings together members of the community for tree plantation drives. THINK ABOUT IT Many communities in India have similar practices that involve community participation. Can you identify a few from your area? We celebrate many festivals in India. During these festivals, people gather to organise all the various activities. They decorate the place together and share the food that they cook. Are these non-economic activities? Why do you think they still hold value? Can you identify community programmes that have been undertaken by your school or in your locality? What did you observe during these programmes? Before we move on... In this chapter, we learnt about economic and non- We also learnt about the value addition that economic We understood how non-economic activities contribute to social welfare, personal wellbeing and enhance the overall quality of life. Questions, activities and projects How are economic activities different from non-economic What kind of economic activities do people engage in? Illustrate with examples. There is great value attached to people who are engaged in community service activities. Comment on this statement. What are the various ways in which people are compensated for various economic activities? Give some Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 14   Economic Activities Around Us that can be in terms of The root of prosperity is economic activity, the lack of it brings material distress. The absence of fruitful economic activity endangers both current prosperity and future growth.   Kau ilya s Artha h stra In Chapter 13, we learnt about two types of activities   economic and non- economic. Activities that create monetary value are called economic activities. We also learnt about the importance of non-economic activities. To understand these activities better we will learn how economic activities are classified and what differentiates them in this chapter. How are economic activities What differentiates these activities to be grouped into How are the three sectors Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Over the decades, the number of economic activities has increased tremendously. For example, earlier most people were involved in activities such as agriculture, livestock rearing, production of tools, pottery and weaving cloth. As societies progressed, the number of economic activities through which people earn their livelihoods increased Today, there are diverse economic activities such as manufacturing computers, mobile phones and drones; working in banks, schools and hotels; driving various types of vehicles for transportation; making furniture; tailoring clothes using machines; creating software; repairing refrigerators and washing machines; etc. Classifying all these activities helps us to understand how they function and the links they have with each other. The Classification of Economic Activities into Economic Sectors Some economic activities share similar characteristics and based on this, they can be grouped together or classified into broader groups called economic sectors. The three main types of economic sectors are primary, secondary and tertiary economic sectors. The illustration on the facing page maps out the broad activities under these categories. A. Primary activities Those economic activities in which people are directly dependent on nature to produce goods are known as primary activities or primary sector economic activities. The group of activities that involves extraction of raw materials directly from nature such as farming, fishing, forestry, etc. of a nation. 14   Economic Activities Around Us Classification of economic activities into economic sectors Trade and logistics Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us For example, work involving cultivation of grains and vegetables from agricultural farms, collecting wood from the forests, extracting coal from mines, fish from fisheries, eggs from poultry farms, etc., are all primary sector The most common primary activities are agriculture, mining, fishing, raising livestock, forestry, etc. Below are some of the types of activities within the primary sectors. Fish farming (fishery) 14   Economic Activities Around Us THINK ABOUT IT Can you think of any primary activities that you may have seen in the past? What are the natural resources used in these activities? Name two of them and discuss your experiences with your classmates. B. Secondary activities Economic activities in which people are dependent on outputs of the primary sector and transform them to produce goods are known as secondary activities or secondary sector economic activities. The secondary sector includes the construction of buildings, roads, etc., and providing utilities like water, electricity, gas and other such necessities. It also includes the manufacturing of products in factories and production units to process raw material from the primary sector into some other form that can be further sold or consumed. Some examples of secondary sector activities include the processing of grains obtained from agricultural fields to make flour in mills, extraction of oil from groundnut and processing of tea leaves to derive tea. Similarly, wood from the forest is converted into furniture and paper, cotton is used to make clothes, and steel from iron ore is used to make automobiles like cars, for sale or Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Furniture production unit DON T MISS OUT Now that we have seen some examples of secondary sector activities, can you name two more economic activities in the Types of Automobiles No. of units produced in India in 2022 Passenger vehicles like cars Commercial vehicles like trucks (Source: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, https://www.siam.in/statistics.aspx?mpgid=8&pgidtrail=13 ) 14   Economic Activities Around Us Services at restaurant The group of sectors, such as used for storing they are sold, used or rented out to shops. C. Tertiary activities All those economic activities that provide support to people involved in primary and secondary activities are called tertiary activities or tertiary sector economic activities. These include services that we may not be able to see but which still play a very important role. For example, the driver of a truck transports grains and vegetables from the farm to a factory or the market. The fruit or vegetable vendors sell the farm produce to household consumers. Similarly, doctors, nurses, teachers, lawyers and pilots provide their services to those who need them. There are technicians who repair and service electronic items including mobile phones and televisions, mechanics who repair vehicles like cars and tractors, and electricians who ensure regular supply of electricity. Their services make our lives easier. Similarly, communication services through mobile and internet, software development, and services at hotels, restaurants, banks, schools, hospitals, airports, shops, warehouses, etc. are all examples of tertiary sector economic activities. This sector is also called the service sector. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Interdependence Among Sectors The three types of economic activities or economic sectors play an important role in the process of conversion of natural raw materials into finished products for final consumption. Let us go on an imaginary excursion to a village in Anand district of Gujarat to study an interesting example where we will understand how the three sectors are interconnected and support each other. Services at airports Dairy cooperative: from farm to plate These days, farmers in Gujarat greet the day with the clinking of milk pails and the happy moos of their best friends, their cows or buffaloes! Cows have a special place in the lives of the farmers and their families. The farmers milk the cows and sell their milk to the dairy nearby. At the end of the month, they get paid for the milk based on its quantity and quality. However, this was not the case about 50 years ago. This is the amazing story of a milk cooperative named Anand Milk Union Limited (AMUL). In the early 1940s, farmers in Anand district would sell milk to the neighbouring villages. 14   Economic Activities Around Us A group of needs in a They own the are taken by fee for this They would have to cycle or walk to nearby villages to sell the milk under scorching heat. As you know, milk spoils or curdles very fast in hot weather. The farmers had to sell the milk quickly before it could spoil. This was a lot of effort for the small amount of money they would earn. So, they depended on people called middlemen, who would buy the milk in bulk at meagre prices from the farmers and sell it in the market. Many times, the farmers felt cheated and harassed by the middlemen. approached Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a prominent national leader, with their problems. He advised them to form a cooperative to become independent and stop relying on the middlemen. As a cooperative, the farmers would be able to buy and sell milk as a group, taking care of the entire operation of milk collection, processing and distribution themselves. The farmers took Sardar Patel s advice. AMUL was set up in 1946 under the leadership of Tribhuvandas Patel (lawyer and freedom fighter) and Dr. Varghese Kurien (an engineer who was working at a dairy factory in Mumbai). Varghese Kurien (left) and Tribhuvandas Patel (right) Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us This initiative brought farmers, including women, together and gave them control over the production and sale of milk. The milk producers collectively made their own decisions on all matters such as production, pasteurisation and sale of milk. The tasks were shared by everyone, which helped raise their income gradually. They did not need the middlemen anymore and became like one big family! As more and more farmers began to see the benefits quantity of milk that was products out of it. They set up a factory in Anand, and began to produce butter and Today, the cooperative has a wide range of products made at many milk processing over India. Can you name a few? The products are then transported and sold in both small and large retail shops all over the country. In fact, they also export the products to several countries around the world. Is it not amazing? In this fascinating story, the farmers of this cooperative milk their cows to sell the milk later. This kind of economic activity is called a primary sector economic activity because the product (milk) is derived directly from a natural source A process by to a specific to kill harmful or group of to make a final sale of goods for use by and sold to 14   Economic Activities Around Us DON T MISS OUT Just like AMUL, there are many other milk cooperatives under brands such as Nandini from Karnataka, Mother Dairy from Delhi-NCR, Aavin from Tamil Nadu, Vijaya from Andhra Pradesh, Kevi from Nagaland, Sudha from Bihar, Verka from Punjab, etc. Can you name one cooperative around you that has helped groups like farmers, persons with disabilities, and women, to come together and has brought prosperity to their Milk is then processed and converted from one form (liquid) into another   milk powder, ghee, cheese, butter and many others in the factories. These economic activities  are called secondary sector economic activities. What does AMUL do with all the products it makes? It sells them in various places. AMUL uses lorries and trucks, as well as railway, air and shipping services, to transport its products. It has set up retail stores and supplies milk and milk products to other shops in towns, cities and villages all over Gujarat, as well as in different states across India. Here, transportation, trading and retail is a tertiary activity. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us With the help of the images below, let s see how the books you study are made. The images show the transformation of pulp (wooden fibre of a tree) into paper and, after printing, into textbooks. 14   Economic Activities Around Us None of the activities that were part of the process   from extracting pulp from the trees to making paper and finally producing the books would have been possible, had it not been for all three sectors working together. THINK ABOUT IT Observe the different stages of the process shown in Fig. 14.1 Label the pictures in the illustration shown in Fig. 14.1 on 1.   Primary sector 2.   Secondary sector 3.   Tertiary sector DON T MISS OUT These days, used paper is recycled to make new paper. Recycling just one tonne of paper saves 17 trees as well as 2.5 cubic metres of landfill space, where waste is dumped. It also takes 70 per cent less energy and water to recycle paper than to make new paper from wood pulp. What are the different ways through which we can judiciously use paper in the classrooms and offices of your school? What are the different ways through which we can judiciously use paper in the classrooms and offices of your school? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us List the economic activities in your neighbourhood and label them appropriately as primary, secondary or tertiary. Draw arrows to show how they are connected to each other. In what ways are they dependent on each other? What would happen if one of the activities ceased to exist? Before we move on... In this chapter, we learnt about the three sectors of economic The various examples and illustrations helped to understand the difference as well as the interdependence between the three types of economic activities or sectors   primary, secondary and tertiary. Questions, activities and projects What is the primary sector? How is it different from the secondary sector? Give two examples. How does the secondary sector depend on the tertiary sector? Illustrate with a few examples. Give an example of interdependence between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors. Show it using a


=== Class8_Economics ===

India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use and Their Use Concerned social scientists are clear on what we need to do: we must move toward a regenerative economy, an economy that operates in harmony with nature, repurposing used resources, minimizing waste, and replenishing depleted resources. We must return to the innate wisdom of nature herself, the ultimate regenerator and recycler of all resources.   Christiana Figueres and Tom Rivett-Carnac in  The Future We Choose  How do we categorise natural What is the connection between the distribution of natural resources and different aspects What are the implications of unsustainable use / over exploitation of natural resources? Fig. 1.1. Dudhsagar waterfall and the railway bridge, Goa, India Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 When does Nature become a Resource? One of the meanings of the word  Nature  is the totality of life and non-life forms that are part of our environment but have not been created by humans. When humans use these for their sustenance, or create new things from them for consumption, these elements of Nature become  resources. For example, trees are part of the environment; they exist independently of humans. When we cut them and convert their wood into furniture, we see the trees as a resource. Often these entities are not easily accessible. For example, there may be petroleum in places deep under the ocean that we do not have the technology to access, or the extraction cost may be too high; or it may be culturally unacceptable like cutting trees in sacred groves. So, for an entity to be called a resource, it should be technologically accessible, and its exploitation should be economically feasible and culturally acceptable. (Usually, the word  exploitation  has a negative connotation; in the context we use it here, it means  extraction, utilisation and consumption of Natural resources.) The Earth has treasures, many of which have formed over millions of years, and which humans have taken and learnt to use. These include the most obvious ones like water, air and soil, and also the not-so-obvious ones like coal, petroleum, precious stones, metal ores, timber, etc. Fig. 1.2. A microhydel plant in Himachal Pradesh the power of flowing water converted into electricity Fig. 1.3. An offshore oil rig extracts petroleum from below the seabed India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use DON T MISS OUT In many indigenous traditions of the world, Nature is considered sacred. You have read about this. In such traditions, Nature is a nurturer and nourisher. Do you know of practices that reflect this? THINK ABOUT IT Take a pause. Look at yourself and the things around you. What is the origin of each of them? At some point they all lead to Nature; even the plastic button on your shirt. In short, we apply the term  natural resources  to materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans. Categories of Natural Resources In Science, we learn the usefulness of categorisation and naming   we use some shared characteristics (or criteria) when we categorise ideas or things; we name the categories so that we can refer to them with just one word or a short phrase. When these names and meanings are shared across groups of people,  it helps Fig. 1.6. Tulasi  puja for wellbeing Fig. 1.5. Honey from a beehive Fig. 1.4. Gentle ploughing causes minimal disturbance to the underground ecosystem and retains soil moisture. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 us discuss a set of ideas or things without needing to describe them every time. We can communicate more effectively, too. In earlier classes, you learnt about living and non-living things. As soon as we use these words, you know what they mean. This is a simple example of categories. We do the same with natural resources. THINK ABOUT IT What might be the different criteria we can use to categorise One of the ways we could categorise natural resources is based on the uses we put them to   essential for our life, source for materials and sources for energy. Resources essential for life Life could not exist on Earth without the air we breathe, the water we drink and the food we eat. We take these from the atmosphere, the rivers and ponds, and through the cultivation of soil or other living things. We cannot make the air we breathe, the water we drink, or the soil which gives us food. Resources for materials Human beings create physical objects out of Nature s gifts. We make them for our utility or to create things of beauty that enrich our lives and those of others   a piece of wood can be transformed into a chair and also carved into a statuette. India s geographical diversity provides us with a wide variety of natural resources, from wood to marble, and coal to gold. Resources for energy Energy is a cornerstone of modern living   electricity for our buildings, transportation, and all types of production processes. This energy can come from diverse natural sources: coal, water, petroleum, natural gas, sunlight, wind, etc. India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use Renewable and non-renewable resources A second way of categorising natural resources could be based on whether they are renewable or not. A general principle of Nature is that it functions in a restorative and regenerative way. Restoration is the process of returning something to its original healthy state if it has been degraded or damaged. Nature heals, renews and maintains herself over time. A cut on your skin will normally heal; a forest recovers after a wildfire. Regeneration goes beyond restoration. It is about Nature s ability to create new life and the conditions for thriving. We plant trees in areas that may have lost them on account of human interventions like clearing forests for housing. Planting the types of trees that were originally growing there restores the ecosystem   the trees provide food and shelter for birds, squirrels and other creatures, enabling life to return. Nature works in cycles where there is no waste. Take a forest. Let s say a tree falls in the forest. It decomposes with the bacteria, fungi and insects feeding on it. The tree becomes part of the soil enriching it. New trees and plants grow from seeds   eventually some will fall and the cycle starts again. These are examples of Nature s principle of restoration and regeneration in practice. Renewable resources exhibit these characteristics over time. Most of India has abundant sunshine. In the natural course, rivers are Fig. 1.7. River water, a renewable resource as long as glaciers and Fig. 1.8. We can take timber from the forest, in limited quantities, for a long time if we allow it to regenerate. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 fed regularly by rain and melting glaciers, forests renew themselves, soil replenishes itself through natural processes, and so on. Solar energy, wind energy, energy from flowing water, timber from forests are renewable resources as long as we are able to manage them in a sustainable manner. However, for them to remain renewable there is a condition   the natural rhythm of restoration and regeneration must not be disturbed. If we harvest timber faster than the forest can grow trees, we will eventually deplete the forest. Scientists have shown that through irresponsible human actions, many of Nature s cycles have been disturbed. A combination of several factors interacting   fossil fuel-driven industrialisation and the cutting down of forests for agriculture and other purposes are two of them   has led to rising temperatures that we are experiencing; on account of this, the glaciers in some places in the Himalayas are melting at a rate faster than precipitation can replace them. This has implications on water security for the populations living in the plains dependent on the  water tower. DON T MISS OUT Traditionally, communities had a system of regulating (or refraining from) fishing during the spawning season to enable the maintenance of the fish population. However, the commercialisation of fishing resulted in over-fishing. In the case of a type of fish called tuna, for example, the rapid and extensive decline in their population led to some agreements on control of fishing. Nevertheless, this important type of fish that keeps the ocean ecosystem in balance by consuming smaller fish, shrimps, etc., is on a decline. Do you know of other traditional practices that help the ecosystem to stay in balance? Fig. 1.9. Offering arghyam to Su rya, the sun-god, in gratitude. of water, as a mark of India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use We need industries to produce the goods we consume. The process also creates wastes that are frequently discharged into rivers and other water bodies. Often, these wastes cannot decay to become the food of some lifeform. Instead, it leads to a disturbance in Nature s cycle of restoration and regeneration, leading to a situation where the river becomes poisonous and cannot support life. Identify human actions in your surroundings that result in Nature losing her ability to restore and regenerate. What types of interventions can be undertaken to restore Nature s DON T MISS OUT Ecosystem functions and ecosystem services: Nature has some inherent ways of working. For example, trees naturally produce oxygen. When these natural processes benefit humans, we call them  ecosystem services. We can think of it like this: a forest naturally filters water, prevents soil erosion, and provides habitat for animals   these are ecosystem functions. When we benefit from clean water, protected farmland, and pollinated crops because of that forest, we are receiving ecosystem services A mature tree produces about 275 litres of oxygen per day (this varies a little depending on the type of tree). A human being needs about 350 litres of oxygen every day (this can change based on the type of activity that an individual engages in, their height and weight, and so on). Fig. 1.10. Waste from industries is often disposed without proper treatment Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Take up a small research study to assess the types of renewable resources in your region; you may discuss with your teacher the geographical area of your study and sources to access information that you may need. What has been the change in their status over time? Make a small report that identifies the reasons for the change and what may be done. Non-renewable resources are created over long periods. They cannot be replenished at the rate we use them. For example, fossil fuels (coal and petroleum), and minerals and metals like iron, copper and gold, are non-renewable resources. India has significant quantities of coal reserves. We mine coal to meet our growing need for energy, but it has been estimated that the coal reserves in India may last another 50 years; the demand for electricity has been increasing as the population expands and development work accelerates. Till more sustainable options become available widely, we need to use the coal we have What are the non-renewable resources that you use daily, directly or indirectly? What are the possible renewable substitutes? What are some of the steps we can take to transition to renewables? Distribution of Natural Resources and its Implications Natural resources are not evenly distributed across our planet or even within countries. This uneven distribution shapes human settlements, trade patterns, international relations, and conflicts too. Many wars have been fought, and continue to be fought, to gain control over natural resources. India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use Observe the map in Fig.1.11. Notice the uneven distribution of important minerals. What types of resources are available in your region? How are they distributed? Industries located near natural resources create employment opportunities for the local people. Townships grow around them and expand economic opportunities for others, too. More modern facilities that improve the quality of life become accessible. However, these benefits are often accompanied by costs, in the short term as well as in the long term. We have examples from across the world of people living in resource-rich areas who have been displaced from their homes to facilitate such Fig. 1.11. Distribution of important minerals Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 developments. In some cases their sacred places are under threat,  leading to conflicts. National and international trade depend on the geographical location of natural resources. knowledge and skills, these can create unique products like the Wootz steel. As we know, trade fuelled the development of large empires in India. Select any two natural resources. Gather information about their availability across different parts of India. Mark them on a map. What do you observe about their distribution? What are the types of economic activities connected with them? Discuss the implications of extracting the natural resources in those parts for current and future gene- rations. Suggest ways in which we can use Nature s gifts in responsible ways. Nature does not pay attention to political boundaries. This leads to tensions regarding the sharing of natural resources across states as well as countries. One example is the sharing of Kaveri River water among Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Puducherry; negotiations and deft management were required to maintain peace and fair sharing. Of course, reaching such agreements between neighbouring countries is not easy. Find out about such a conflict in the international context. Discuss your findings in the class. Fig. 1.12. Shared waters of the India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use The  Natural Resource Curse  Having abundant natural resources does not guarantee economic prosperity. Some regions rich in natural resources can experience slower economic growth and development   a phenomenon economists call the  natural resource curse  or the  paradox of plenty. Put very simply, this means that often having plenty of natural resources does not automatically mean that a country is rich. Frequently, economies are unable to develop industries that convert the resources into products of higher value; the chapter  Factors of Production  in the latter part of this book will give you an understanding of this. India has generally avoided this curse by investing in the development of such industries to meet our growing needs. What do you think are the different inputs required to enable the use of the natural resources available in different However, the challenge of balancing resource extraction with sustainability remains. Understanding and managing natural resources is a valuable starting point, but human knowledge, good governance, and strategic planning determine whether they become lasting benefits or temporary windfalls. Fig. 1.13. Mettur dam in Tamil Nadu built on the Kaveri river Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Responsible and Wise Use of Natural Sustaining life on Earth requires that we respect Nature and use natural resources in a way that enables the restoration and regeneration of renewable resources, and the responsible and judicious use of non-renewable ones. Scientists studying these aspects have warned that the irresponsible treatment of natural resources has led to pollution, biodiversity loss and climate change, which has been taking place at an increased pace in recent years. Restoration and regeneration of Here are two examples of how we are pushing the use of natural resources beyond their capacity to regenerate. Many farmers in our country extract groundwater for irrigation purposes. In most states, the extraction rate is greater than the rate at which the water table is replenished. Over time, this deficit builds up, leading to higher cost of extraction of groundwater and eventually to its unavailability. It has been predicted that many of our growing cities will run out of groundwater soon. Initiatives to raise groundwater levels have been launched to remedy this. Traditional practices of water harvesting, rejuvenation of ponds and tanks, cutting down on wasteful consumption of water, processing and reusing water are some of the strategies attempted. chemical fertilisers and pesticides has led to soil degradation. Tradi- tional farming practices considered soil to be part of Mother Earth. Practices like the use of cow dung and other natural fertilisers, mulching, multi-cropping, and so on, enabled holistic soil management. We must learn from these practices and apply life on Earth Fig. 1.14. Crop failure on account of injudicious use of chemical fertilisers India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use them in our current situation to prevent further degradation. We need to replenish and rejuvenate our soil. Overexploitation of groundwater: a caselet from Punjab A crisis has unfolded in the fertile plains of Punjab where groundwater resources have been severely depleted. Punjab was home to the Green Revolution that fed a large proportion of our population, and contributed to India becoming self-sufficient in food. Today the same state faces issues of sustainability   Nature has been exploited beyond regeneration, at least in the short term. However, this concern is not particular to Punjab; it affects many other states. In the 1960s, farmers shifted to high-yielding varieties of wheat and paddy. These required more water than the traditional seeds, and farmers began to extract groundwater to meet this need. In addition, the supply of free power led to the over-pumping of groundwater (a situation still prevalent in much of India today). Modern farming techniques also required the use of chemical pesticides and fertilisers. The combined effect of these factors is that the groundwater level in a large part of Punjab (see fig. 1.17) has become inaccessible till depths of about 30 metres; and the chemicals from the pesticides and fertilisers have dissolved in the groundwater causing health hazards. Fig. 1.16. Wet paddy fields Fig. 1.15.  Extraction of groundwater Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Almost 80% of the area of Punjab has been classified as  over- exploited; in other words, we have drawn water at a rate much greater than at which restoration and rejuvenation of groundwater is possible. We can see that food security was ensured for the short term, but the long-term consequences will take time and effort to heal. Fig 1.17. Depth to water level map of Punjab and Chandigarh, June 2022 (m bgl = metres below ground level) Depth to Water Level (m bgl) 74  00'00" E 74  00'00" E 75  00'00" E 75  00'00" E 76  00'00" E 76  00'00" E 77  00'00" E 31  00'00" N 30  00'00" N 32  00'00" N Depth to Water Level Map of Punjab State & Chandigarh (U.T.) 31  00'00" N 30  00'00" N 32  00'00" N India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use The case of cement We cannot imagine life without cement. Our houses, schools and hospitals and other buildings, bridges, roads and airports, all require cement. The production of cement has been listed as one of the most polluting industries. The process of production releases fine dust that enters our lungs and those of animals damaging them, settles on leaves of plants decreasing their yields, and causes soil and water pollution too. The Central Pollution Control Board has created guidelines for cement factories to ensure that the pollution is minimised or eliminated. In addition, there is a move towards creating alternative materials that reduce pollution. These include the use of traditional materials like stone and mud, new plant-based materials and recycled materials from waste plastic. Fig. 1.19. A community building in Auroville constructed by Auroville Earth Institute (which holds the UNESCO Chair for Earthen Architecture). This modern building is made of mud using special techniques. Fig. 1.18. Jaisalmer fort, Rajasthan. A mud structure built in the 12th century and refurbished later using sandstone. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Traditional materials and methods are being combined with modern technological advances to create new materials that are sustainable   the process of production is less polluting, provides local employment, and is designed keeping in mind the climate of the place. Vr iks ha yurveda is an ancient Indian botanical science that focuses on the study and care of plants and trees. The term comes from Sanskrit, with vr iks ha meaning tree and ayurveda meaning the science of life or health. This traditional knowledge system dates back several millennia and was formalised in texts such as Surapala s Vr iks ha yurveda around the 10th century CE. It has elaborate recommendations on the specific plants to be grown on different soil types, and provides intricate methods for seed collection, preservation, and pre-planting treatments. recommendations varying according to plant species, growth stage, and seasonal conditions. It specifies pest management strategies through natural repellents and plants that should be grown together. This form of sustainable agriculture promotes practices like crop rotation and mixed cropping to maintain soil health. Vr iks ha yurveda also offers advice on proper methods of ploughing soil so as to retain soil moisture as well as facilitate the growth of living organisms in the soil like fungi, bacteria and A caselet from Sikkim Pema s family farm in Sikkim faced inputs. When the state government announced a policy to promote organic farming throughout the state, Pema s family decided to try. It was not an easy transition   initially the yields dropped as the soil was recovering from years of chemical use. Fig. 1.20. Organic farming in Sikkim India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use Fig. 1.21. Satellite image of one of the largest solar parks in the world located in Rajasthan. It can generate enough electricity to power about 15% of the current needs of Rajasthan. The family switched to compost, prepared natural pest repellents using neem and garlic, and started growing multiple crops across the year. After about five years, Pema s farm was thriving. She was able to sell her cardamom, ginger, and traditional vegetables at premium prices. In 2016, Sikkim became a 100 per cent organic state with all of its farmland certified organic. The effects were transformational   local biodiversity flourished, with beneficial insects and birds returning; tourism increased as visitors came to see the organic farming model, and farmers  incomes grew by 20 per cent on average. Today, Sikkim serves as a global model, demonstrating that an entire region can successfully transition to sustainable agricultural practices while improving both ecological and economic outcomes. Responsible and judicious use of resources In the case of non-renewables we need to ensure that we use the resources so that they can last long enough for humanity to find more sustainable alternatives. For example, we need to make the switch to renewable sources of energy for as many purposes as we can. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 The International Solar Alliance   India s leadership in India and France launched the International Alliance for Solar Energy (IASE) in 2015   a coalition of sunshine-rich countries committed to harnessing solar power. The alliance focuses on countries blessed with abundant sunlight throughout the year. India has helped channel billions of dollars into solar projects across developing nations, sharing technical expertise and creating affordable financing options. The Bhadla Solar Park is a symbol of India s solar ambitions, demonstrating how a country can transition from traditional energy sources to renewable alternatives. For Indians, this alliance represents both environmental responsibility and economic opportunity. Fig. 1.22. Solar farm near Raichur Even as we deal with these issues we must be mindful that the distribution and access to resources, including basic ones like water and clean air, is often unfair to some sections of society. In cities, many areas do not receive adequate and regular supply of drinking water. Air pollution caused by industries and excessive use of fossil fuels, affects those who are unable to protect themselves from these hazards. We must remember our relationship with Nature and act as stewards of natural resources toward restoration, regeneration, and sustainability. The Bhagavad G t  refers to lokasangraha, India and the World: Land and the People 1   Natural Resources and Their Use the idea that everyone must transcend personal desires and act for the wellbeing of all. Has the time come for us to consider this Before we move on...  Natural resources  are materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans. There are different ways of categorising resources; renewable and non-renewable are useful categories. The  resource curse  can be overcome through investments in the development of technology and skills. We need to become vigilant about the rate at which we use renewables so as not to overexploit them; judicious and wise use of non-renewables will enable stretching their use for a longer period of time. Questions and activities 1. What can make what is today a renewable resource non- renewable tomorrow? Describe some actions that can prevent this from happening. 2. Name five ecosystem functions that serve humans. 3. What are renewable resources? How are they different from non-renewable ones? What can people do to ensure that renewable resources continue to be available for our use and that of future generations? Give two examples. 4. Identify cultural practices in your home and neighbourhood that point to mindfulness in the use of natural resources. 5. What are some considerations to keep in mind in the production of goods for our current use? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 A NOTE ON HISTORY S DARKER PERIODS History sometimes seems to be full of wars and destruction; it is true that it rarely focuses on periods when the society is, on the whole, harmonious and peaceful. But while every country may have had such peaceful eras and some benevolent rulers, history seems peopled by incompetent, corrupt or cruel rulers. We find them especially in what we may call the darker chapters or periods of history, when war, abuse, fanaticism, bloodshed, etc., suddenly dominate the landscape and inflict suffering and misery on the whole society or country. The world over, historians have faced this dilemma: how much attention should we draw to such darker periods? Should we omit them entirely? Should we mention them in passing, with most atrocious details left out? Or should we face them and analyse them so as to understand what made such developments possible and, hopefully, help avoid their recurrence in future? The third option is, in our opinion, the best, if it can be done with enough detachment and sensitivity; it is important to know our past, pleasant or unpleasant, since the past continues to live with us and shapes the present. What do we mean by  detachment and sensitivity ? Simply that it is important to study those darker developments dispassionately, without blaming anyone living today for them. For instance, you will learn later that World War II (1939 1945) resulted in millions of deaths worldwide; Germany then followed a cruel ideology (known as  Nazism ) which believed in the extermination of  inferior races  and resulted in the inhuman treatment of some ethnic groups and a brutal rule of occupied nations. Yet it would be clearly unacceptable to blame today s Germans for what happened over eight decades ago. Rather, what matters is to understand what made the Nazi ideology possible, so that similar ideologies today or tomorrow may be defeated. The same principle applies to the  Tapestry of the Past  chapters in this textbook, which include passages on warfare and instances of cruelty or brutality. While those happenings cannot be erased or denied, it would be wrong to hold anyone today responsible for them. Understanding the historical origin of cruel violence, abusive misrule or misplaced ambitions of power is the best way to heal the past and build a future where, hopefully, they will have no place. Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production Factors of Production For a country like India, the largest contribution to growth and productivity will probably come about from more efficiently using land, labour and capital, thus they must be used more efficiently.   Bibek Debroy, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (2017-24) What are the factors of How are these factors What is the role of human capital in production, and what are its facilitators? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Have you ever wondered how your clothes, shoes, school bag, furniture, phone, computer, etc., are made? Every product around you goes through a production process before it finally reaches you. This production process involves using resources or inputs required to produce the final product. The resources or inputs used in producing goods and services are hence called factors of production. Businesses combine various inputs or factors of production to create goods and services, which also generate opportunities for people to engage in economic activities. A firm, a Meet Ratna, who runs a small restaurant named Pause Point, on the city outskirts. Popular among highway travellers for its tasty, high-quality food, Pause Point is growing with a team of seven people who assist Ratna in managing the business. When she started five years ago, she had to choose a location, organise money for rent and equipment, hire staff, buy ingredients, and plan how to make her dream a success. Fig. 7.2. A glimpse at the production of some goods Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production In small groups, study the economic activities around your locality. What are the different types of goods and services being made or provided? Here s a small report that Latha, Asha, Mohan, and Kiran made. You can make your own report for shops of your choice. Types of inputs like vegetables and fruits, gas, utensils; scale, cart or stall Tools, spare parts, skills of mobile Looking at your group s report, think about the following: Where do people get the money that they need for their Where did the hairdresser get trained? Who taught the food vendors to cook? What motivated the business owners to start their business? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 In economics, the inputs used in a production process or the factors of production are classified into four types   land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship. Technology is a facilitator and a crucial factor that enables businesses to produce more goods with the same or fewer inputs. Let s learn more about these inputs in the sections ahead! Factors of Production Land (natural resources) The word  land  in economics encompasses not only geographical land but also natural resources like soil, forests, water, air, sunlight, minerals, oil, and natural gas. Recollect the chapter on Natural Resources and Their Use, where we discussed different types of resources that nature gifts to us and how we use them. Businesses either purchase the required land or pay rent to use it for a period of time. Revisit the table in your report. Which of the items on your list can be labelled as  land ? Labour (human resources) Labour is essential in production, involving physical and mental effort. Carpenters, farmers, construction workers, teachers, and doctors use varying levels of physical strength, knowledge, and skill. Everyone contributes differently through their work, helping create goods and services for society s needs. People as a resource Human beings play a key role in economic activities and production processes as they apply their knowledge, skills, and decision-making abilities to create goods and services. For example, a police officer maintains law and order, a scientist invents new technologies, a chef develops new recipes, etc. They all require a special set of knowledge and skills to perform well. Of course, they all must be dedicated to their work to do to do an Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production a good job. The word labour refers to the physical and mental effort used in production. However, human capital refers to the specialised skills, knowledge, abilities and expertise required to perform that labour. Thus, human capital is not just the basic efforts of labour but also the quality and efficiency of that labour. Facilitators of human capital Education and training Education helps individuals gain knowledge, starting with basic literacy and extending to expertise in specific fields. What you Fig. 7.5. Carpenter Fig. 7.6. Software developer Fig. 7.3. Worker at a tea plantation Fig. 7.4. Chemical engineer Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 learn in school enriches your knowledge and prepares you to solve real-world problems. For example, a civil engineering student learns principles of design and materials, which are applied to building infrastructure like roads and bridges. The challenge lies in creating durable, cost-efficient, and eco- friendly solutions. This is achieved through training, such as observing construction sites, testing materials, understanding safety procedures and hands-on application. With education and training, individuals are prepared to excel in their careers. Good health supports cognitive development, allowing children to attend school regularly and learn better. Similarly, workers are able to give their best, physically and mentally, when they are of sound body. They are able to do more in shorter time periods, be creative, and do not have to be away from work due to ill health. THINK ABOUT IT How do infrastructure and healthcare systems like hospitals, primary healthcare centres, doctors, pharmacies, diagnostic labs, etc., contribute to developing human capital? It refers to It is the skills to do a Fig. 7.7. Education and training Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production Social and cultural influences A culture of hard work, continuous improvement, and endeavouring to do things well has helped countries to move forward. There is a Japanese concept called kaizen, which means  continuous improvement. This concept has been applied in Japan since the mid-1940s and has helped Japan achieve higher standards of living for its people. Another example could be that of the German work ethic, which is deeply rooted in their history. Germany is renowned for its high-quality industrial output. They place a high value on punctuality, attention to detail and quality. These qualities of their human capital contributed to their rise as a global leader in technology and manufacturing. Let s do a small experiment. Make a list of 10 working adults in your family and neighbourhood. Ask them to describe the culture at their workplace. Share notes with your classmates. What did you discover? What are some adjectives that occur more frequently? In the Tapestry chapters, you have seen examples of the art and architecture in India across several centuries. What do you think are the factors that enabled their creators to achieve such high levels of excellence? Discuss in groups and share in class. Challenges to human capital Our nation has come a long way in various aspects of human capital since independence. Literacy is an important characteristic of the population and helps enhance the skills and productivity of human capital. The Adult Literacy Rate in India is 85 per cent for males and 70 per cent for females as of 2023, as per the World Bank estimates. Despite progress in many areas, India faces challenges in developing human capital. Ability to do more in a of people aged 15 and above who can read and write with a short, simple Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 THINK ABOUT IT Shivay, a student at Saraswati Vidyalaya in Grade 8, had to drop out of school two years back as his father lost his job. How do you think the loss of schooling years will affect Shivay when he grows up? What problems could businesses face when they do not find workers with the required skills? According to the Economic Survey of India 2024, 65 per cent of people in India are below the age of 35 years. This means that India has a young, productive population, which may help the country reap the benefits of a demographic dividend. The the benefit a country gets when it has a large number of young and working people. When more people are working and earning, and fewer people depend on them, the country can grow businesses and improve living standards. To take advantage of this potential, individuals must have access to quality education, health, training, and skilling, which would contribute to the nation s progress. You will learn more about this in the year ahead in the chapter on Demographics. THINK ABOUT IT Are some jobs more important than others? What would happen if nobody cleaned the streets, collected the trash, farmers stopped cultivating the crops, doctors were not available to treat patients, and so on? Today, there is a vast variety of jobs requiring different kinds of skills. However, India has had a rich legacy of skill-based knowledge systems and workmanship. Fig. 7.8. Students writing an exam Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production India s ancient skill heritage For ancient Indians, work was a form of expressing their nature and striving for perfection, an offering to the deity or the receiver, as the case may be. It had to be created or done with devotion. The tools (a type of technology) used were worshipped; this tradition continues as 9i hwaNarm  p M  or  yudha p M. So, creating products involved a unique blend of Nal  (art) and Yidy  (knowledge). Knowledge was passed on from generation to generation, and also built on. The  hilpa  h stras are ancient texts that contain detailed design guidelines on sculptures, paintings, buildings, wooden items, and jewellery. For example, texts on sculpture prescribe exact specifications regarding postures, colours, measurements, and proportions of figures. DON T MISS OUT Generations of families of sculptors have worked on constructing India s temples over centuries. They used their skills without expecting to see the finished outcome. They pursued excellence, considering work as worship by practising regularly and learning new techniques. Fig. 7.9. Re-creation of a 5th-century stitched ship Indians used a unique stitching technique dating back over 2000 years to make ships and boats, which they used to conduct maritime trade and cultural exchanges across the Indian Ocean. The technique involved stitching wooden planks together using cords instead of nails, which made them flexible and helped the ships navigate the Indian Ocean with ease. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Many of the traditional techniques of production have either disappeared or are on a decline. For example, the stitching of ships saw a severe decline after the arrival of Europeans in the Indian Ocean in the 16th century. This technique is now used for small fishing boats. Why do you think the use of indigenous techniques has declined? Discuss in the class. Find out some techniques and products from your region that showcase human effort and skill. Explain briefly using drawings and text in the class. Fig. 7.10. Machinery Fig. 7.11. Loans Businesses also require capital that comprises monetary resources and durable assets like machinery, tools, equipment, vehicles, vending carts, computers, shops, factories, office buildings, etc., for their day-to-day operations. Just as Ratna would have required money to take the land on lease, buy the furniture and kitchen equipment, etc. These are all called  capital    money plus human-made resources that are used to produce goods and services. Capital is essential to a manufacturing unit or a services sector enterprise. But where do businesses get the capital? Generally, Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production personal savings, family, and friends are the first source of funds and support for individuals when they start a business, just as Ratna did when she started her business. However, the funds were insufficient for Ratna to start the business, so she took a loan from the bank to meet the shortfall. She paid interest along with a part of her loan amount over a period of time. Similarly, large companies require a lot of money to expand their business; hence, they raise money from the general public through the stock market. The stock market is a special type of market where shares are bought and sold. Large companies raise money from the public by offering them a share of the profits, called a dividend. In other words, big businesses can raise money or financial capital through such a market and can sell shares of their business. You will learn the exact mechanism of how this works in the higher grades. Identify a factory in your region. Find out how much capital may have been invested in the construction of the factory (you may provide an estimate). What kinds of equipment does the factory use to create its finished products? Entrepreneurship means starting your own business or creating something new to solve a problem. An entrepreneur is a person out of its paid by the a loan to the money for a Fig. 7.12. Bamboo and cane products, Fig. 7.13. Food processing Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 who comes up with an idea, takes risks, gathers other factors of production, and works hard to make their startup idea An entrepreneur s vision for solving a problem helps bring innovative products and services to the market that benefit society and the nation. At the same time, they also create job opportunities and support livelihoods. In return, they derive a deep sense of satisfaction from seeing their dreams become a reality and serving the people. Thus, an entrepreneur is one who: Fig. 7.14. Pottery products, Delhi Fig. 7.15. Petrochemical plant is resolute to solve it with the welfare of society with his/ Fig. 7.16. Tasks performed by an entrepreneur A startup is an aims at rapid Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production The man who dreamed big for India J.R.D. Tata   entrepreneur, industrialist and philanthropist Tata was one of India s greatest entrepreneurs and played a big role in building modern India. He was born in 1904 and became the head of the Tata Group, one of the largest business groups in the country. He believed that businesses should not only make money but also help society. He started India s first airline, Tata Airlines, in 1932, which later became Air India. Under his leadership, the Tata Group expanded into many areas like steel, cars, power, and chemicals. J.R.D. Tata was also known for caring about his workers and believed in providing them with good working conditions. He was a man of vision, hard work, and honesty. In 1992, he received the Bharat Ratna, India s highest civilian award, for his great service to the nation. THINK ABOUT IT What could be the lessons for young entrepreneurs that you can gather from the above case? Does the existing knowledge of the entrepreneur help in finding solutions to the problem at hand? Or do they need to seek other sources? Is profit the only motivation for an entrepreneur? Why or What are the other personality traits required to be a Fig. 7.17. J.R.D. Tata Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Technology: An Enabler Technology means the application of scientific knowledge. For example, a camera converts light into electrical signals to create a digital image. Any production-related activity uses some form of technology. Some early forms of technology that have existed since ancient times are still in use today. Today, newer and advanced technological developments are applied in various areas, making our lives easier. For example, payments can be made at the click of a button through UPI (Unified Payments Interface); farmers can get advance weather updates; Global Positioning Systems (GPS) can discover the shortest routes for transporting goods, and so on. Fig. 7.18. Drones spraying fertilisers to improve crop health Fig. 7.19. Robots assisting in Have you noticed how old technology gets replaced by a new, This process makes it easier for people and businesses to get things done and improve how they work. For example, instead of sending letters by post, we now use email to communicate with people quickly and at a lower cost. However, remember that technological progress does not always mean replacing old technologies   some, like pulleys and wheelbarrows, are still in use. Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production Technology paving the way for accessing knowledge, skills, and job opportunities A variety of online courses are avail- able to students through Government Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds), which offers courses for Grade 9 onwards and operates on Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) through which learners can explore subjects like robotics, aquaculture, textile printing, and so on that are free of cost. Students benefit from learning at their own pace, from anywhere, while pursuing other jobs or courses. Online portals, like the Government s National Career Service, help people find job opportunities across various sectors, from plumbing to accounting. This is how technology has eliminated geographical barriers, allowing people access to knowledge, skill development and jobs in India and abroad. The services to these online portals can be accessed through the following links: Fig. 7.21. Pulley used in boats Fig. 7.20. A wheelbarrow on a Fig. 7.22. Online learning Now, let s look at examples of how technology is helping students learn, build new skills, and find jobs. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Can you think of some technological advancements that have impacted the lives of people and communities around you? Talk to elders at home and in the neighbourhood about it. Think of an invention that you would like to make to solve a problem. Write its related information on a piece of paper, such as its name, what it does, and how it works, sketches or drawings of what it would look like, and so on. Discuss with your classmates. How are the Factors Connected? The factors   land, labour, capital, entrepreneurship and technology are combined to produce goods and services, and the proportion of each factor used depends on the product. For example, output from the agriculture, construction, and handicraft sectors relies more on labour and thus is labour- intensive, while semiconductor chips or satellites require more capital, specialised machinery, and are capital-intensive. These factors complement each other and are interconnected; in case of some missing or misused factors, production can become inefficient or can be halted. However, in some cases, new techniques can change the proportion used and output. For instance, increased machine use in agriculture can lower dependence on labour. Similarly, 3-D printing can help revive the dying art forms in textiles by producing handloom products at a large scale to serve the market. The production inputs are available at different geographic locations. Businesses can procure them from these varied locations and combine the inputs to produce goods and services. Thus, the geographic interconnectedness provides businesses with access to varied inputs. However, production activities sometimes face severe supply chain challenges. The supply chain is a network of individuals, organisations, resources, activities and technology that are involved in the production and sale of goods. Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production When a disruption in the supply chain occurs due to relying on sources from far-off places, instead of local inputs, it results in a halt in the production process, as was the case during the DON T MISS OUT India is the world s second-largest mobile phone manufacturer after China in 2025! Let s understand these ideas through a flow chart depicting mobile phone manufacturing. Human effort is involved at every stage of production to design, supervise, and improve products and processes. For example, teams of software, electrical, and mechanical engineers, along with project managers, use their expertise to develop a product. The entrepreneur provides guidance on how resources should be used. Then, procuring resources like land, factory space, machinery, and skilled workers requires financial resources. Together, all these inputs are essential, working like puzzle pieces to create the goods and services we rely on! The process of mobile phone assembly and set up to retail stores Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Factors of Production When we produce goods, we use natural resources like land, water, and minerals. However, these resources are limited and can be harmed if we are not careful. For example, in Tamil Nadu, many people earn money by working in leather factories. This helps the local economy, but the waste from these factories can pollute rivers and soil. In the same way, when old smartphones are not recycled properly, harmful substances like lead and mercury can leak into the ground and water. This pollution can be dangerous for people, animals, and plants. That is why it is important for producers to use natural resources responsibly   so that we can meet our needs today without making it harder for future generations to meet theirs. They should try to reduce waste, avoid pollution, and protect the environment while THINK ABOUT IT How are local communities and biodiversity affected by such activities? Do you also know some places around you that have seen water and land degradation over time? Discuss in class. So, it is important for producers to adopt sustainable practices to replenish natural resources for future use. Fig. 7.24. Recycling industrial wastewater before releasing it into water bodies Fig. 7.25. Use of recycled products as inputs Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production Apart from land and natural resources, businesses have responsibilities towards their workers and employees, which are summarised below. Fair compensation and working conditions: Employers need to ensure that workers are paid fairly for their labour and that they work in a safe environment. Skill development and training: There is a responsibility to invest in training and education to ensure that workers develop the skills necessary to remain competitive in the Workplace rights and protections: Laws and regulations for workers  rights relating to fair treatment, preventing discrimination, and providing benefits like health care or paid leave should be adhered to. Businesses are motivated to address social and environmental concerns in their operations to benefit society and biodiversity through Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). This includes reducing polluting activities, addressing the well-being of local communities, treating employees and customers with respect, and so on. DON T MISS OUT India was the first nation in the world to bring a Corporate Social Responsibility law in 2014 that mandated companies to spend 2 per cent of their average profits of the last three years on CSR activities. Before we move on... Land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship are factors of production that are used in a particular proportion to produce goods and services. These factors complement each other and are interconnected. Human capital is the knowledge, skills, experience, and ability of individuals that contribute to their ability to perform work and create economic value. It is influenced Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 by education, training, health, use of technology, and social context that make people more productive in the The resources help in the production of goods and services that serve society and need to be preserved and utilised Questions and activities How are the factors of production different from each other? What are the difficulties you faced in classifying the factors of production in the exercise given in-text? How does human capital differ from physical capital? How do you think technology is changing how people develop their skills and knowledge? A skill is something you learn and practice to get better. It helps you do things well, like playing a sport, creative writing, solving math problems, cooking, or even communicating well with people. If you could learn one skill today, what would it be and why? Do you think entrepreneurship is the  driving force  of production? Why or why not? Can technology replace other factors like labour? Is this good or bad? Support your answer with the help of an How do education and skill training affect human capital? Can they substitute for each other, or do they complement Imagine you want to start a business that produces steel water bottles. What kind of inputs are needed? How would you obtain them? Suppose one of the factors is missing; what happens to your business operations? Interview an entrepreneur or founder to understand their motivation to start a business and the opportunities and Economic Life Around Us 7   Factors of Production challenges they saw. You can work in pairs to create a questionnaire to collect the information and share what you have learned in a report. 10. Think like an economist. Let s explore what happens when things change. If you were Ratna, what would you do in the following situations? Discuss with your classmates. Suppose the rent for your space suddenly doubles. Will you raise the price of the food served to cover Will you look for a cheaper location? How does this affect your business? Imagine one of your helpers quits suddenly. Can the remaining workers manage the same amount of work? Will you need to offer a higher salary to attract a III. You receive a small loan to invest in better technology for your restaurant. Will this increase the production or improve Will it help you reach more customers? IV. Suppose another restaurant opens in the How will you attract and keep your customers? Will you improve your service, reduce prices, or offer something new? What government laws or rules should be changed to improve the ease of doing business?


=== Class9_Economics ===

The Story of Village Palampur The purpose of the story is to introduce some basic concepts relating to production and this we do through a story of a hypothetical village called Palampur.* Farming is the main activity in manufacturing, dairy, transport, etc. are carried out on a limited scale. These production activities need various types of resources   natural resources, man- made items, human effort, money, etc. As we read through the story of Palampur, we will learn how various resources combine to produce the desired goods and services in the village. neighbouring villages and towns. Raiganj, a big village, is 3 kms from Palampur. An all weather road connects the village to Raiganj and further on to the nearest small town of Shahpur. Many kinds of transport are visible on this road starting from bullock carts, tongas, bogeys (wooden cart drawn by buffalos) loaded with jaggery (gur) and other commodities to motor vehicles like motorcycles, jeeps, tractors This village has about 450 families belonging to several different castes. The 80 upper caste families own the majority of land in the village. Their houses, some of them quite large, are made of brick with cement plastering. The SCs (dalits) comprise one third of the population and live in one corner of the village and in much smaller houses some of which are of mud and straw. Most of the houses have electric connections. Electricity powers all the tubewells in the fields and is used in various types of small business. Palampur has two primary schools and one high school. There is a primary health centre run by the government and one private dispensary where the sick are treated. The description above shows that Palampur has fairly well-developed system of roads, transport, electricity, irrigation, schools and health centre. Compare these facilities with those in your nearby village. The story of Palampur, an imaginary village, will take us through the different types of production activities in the village. In villages across India, farming is the main production activity. The other production activities, referred to as non- manufacturing, transport, shop-keeping, etc. We shall take a look at both these types of activities, after learning a few general things about production. The Story of Village Palampur The Story of Village Palampur Picture 1.1 Scene of a village * The narrative is partly based on a research study by Gilbert Etienne of a village in Bulandshahr district in Western Organisation of Production The aim of production is to produce the goods and services that we want. There are four requirements for production of goods and services. The first requirement is land, and other natural resources such as water, The second requirement is labour, i.e. people who will do the work. Some production activities require highly educated workers to perform the necessary tasks. Other activities require workers who can do manual work. Each worker is providing the labour necessary The third requirement is physical capital, i.e. the variety of inputs required at every stage during production. What are the items that come under physical (a) Tools, machines, buildings: Tools and machines range from very simple tools such as a farmer s plough to sophisticated machines such as generators, turbines, computers, etc. Tools, machines, buildings can be used in production over many years, and are called fixed capital. (b) Raw materials and money in hand: Production requires a variety of raw materials such as the yarn used by the weaver and the clay used by the potter. Also, some money is always required during production to make payments and buy other necessary items. Raw materials and money in hand are called working capital. Unlike tools, machines and buildings, these are used up in production. There is a fourth requirement too. Y will need knowledge and enterprise to be able to put together land, labour and physical capital and produce an output either to use yourself or to sell in the market. This these days is called human capital. We shall learn more about human capital in the next chapter. In the picture, identify the land, labour and fixed capital used in production. A factory, with several  labourers Every production is organised by combining land, labour, physical capital and human capital, which are known as factors of production. As we read through the story of Palampur, we will learn more about the first three factors of production. For convenience, we will refer to the physical capital as the capital in this chapter. Farming in Palampur 1. Land is fixed Farming is the main production activity in Palampur. 75 per cent of the people who are working are dependent on farming for their livelihood. They could be farmers or farm labourers. The well- being of these people is closely related to production on the farms. But remember that there is a basic constraint in raising farm production. Land area under cultivation is practically fixed. Since 1960 in Palampur, there has been no expansion in land area under The Story of Village Palampur cultivation. By then, some of the wastelands in the village had been converted to cultivable land. There exists no further scope to increase farm production by bringing new land under larger areas of land more effectively. The first few tubewells were installed by the government. Soon, however, farmers started setting up private tubewells. As a result, by mid-1970s the entire cultivated area of 200 hectares (ha.) was irrigated. The standard unit of measuring land is hectare, though in the villages you may find land area being discussed in local units such as bigha, guintha etc. One hectare equals the area of a square with one side measuring 100 metres.  Can you compare the area of a 1 hectare field with the area of your 2. Is there a way one can grow more from the same land? In the kind of crops grown and facilities available, Palampur would resemble a village of the western part of the state of Uttar Pradesh. All land is cultivated in Palampur. No land is left idle. During the rainy season (kharif) farmers grow jowar and bajra. These plants are used as cattle feed. It is followed by cultivation of potato between October and December. In the winter season (rabi), fields are sown with wheat. From the wheat produced, farmers keep enough wheat for the family s consumption and sell the surplus wheat at the market at Raiganj. A part of the land area is also devoted to sugarcane which is harvested once every year. Sugarcane, in its raw form, or as jaggery, is sold to traders in Shahpur. The main reason why farmers are able to grow three different crops in a year in Palampur is due to the well-developed system of irrigation. Electricity came early to Palampur. Its major impact was to transform the system of irrigation. Persian wheels were, till then, used by farmers to draw water from the wells and irrigate small fields. People saw that the electric-run tubewells could irrigate much Not all villages in India have such high levels of irrigation.  Apart from the riverine plains, coastal regions in our country are well-irrigated.  In contrast, plateau regions such as the Deccan plateau have low levels of irrigation.  Of the total cultivated area in the country a little less than 40 per cent is irrigated even today.  In the remaining areas, farming is largely dependent on rainfall. To grow more than one crop on a piece of land during the year is known as multiple cropping. It is the most common way of increasing production on a given piece of land. All farmers in Palampur grow atleast two main crops; many are growing potato as the third crop in the past fifteen to twenty years. Picture 1.3  Different crops The following Table1.1 shows the land under cultivation in India in units of million hectares. Plot this on the graph provided. What does the graph show? Discuss in class. Name of crop Source of irrigation (Rain, tanks, tubewells, canals, etc.) Picture 1.4 Modern Farming Methods: HYV seeds, chemical fertilizer etc. Table 1.1: Cultivated area over the years Is it important to increase the area under irrigation? Why? You have read about the crops grown in Palampur. Fill the following table based on information on the crops grown in your region. You have seen that one way of increasing production from the same land is by multiple cropping. The other way is to use modern farming methods for higher yield. Yield is measured as crop produced on a given piece of land during a single season. Till the mid- 1960s, the seeds used in cultivation were traditional ones with relatively low yields. Traditional seeds needed less irrigation. Farmers used cow-dung and other natural manure as fertilizers. All these were readily available with the farmers who did not have to buy them. The Green Revolution in the late 1960s introduced the Indian farmer to cultivation of wheat and rice using high yielding varieties (HYVs) of seeds. Compared to the traditional seeds, the HYV seeds promised to produce much greater amounts of grain on a single plant. As a result, the same piece of land would now produce far larger quantities of foodgrains than was possible earlier. HYV seeds, however, needed plenty of water and also chemical fertilizers and pesticides to produce best results. (P) - Provisional Data Source: Pocket Book of Agriculture Statistics 2020, Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and (in Million ctares) Cultivated area (in million hectares) The Story of Village Palampur Modern farming methods require the farmer to start with more cash than During your field visit talk to some farmers of your region. Find out: 1. What kind of farming methods   modern or traditional or mixed   do the farmers use? Write a note. 2. What are the sources of irrigation? 3. How much of the cultivated land is irrigated? (very little/nearly half/ 4. From where do farmers obtain the inputs that they require? 3. Will the land sustain? Land being a natural resource, it is necessary to be careful in its use. Scientific reports indicate that the modern farming methods have overused the natural resource base. In many areas, Green Revolution is associated with the loss of soil fertility due to increased use of chemical fertilisers. Also, continuous use of groundwater for tubewell irrigation has led to the depletion of the water-table. Environmental resources, like soil fertility and groundwater, are built up over years. Once destroyed it is very difficult to restore them. We must take care of the development of agriculture. After reading the following reports from newspapers/magazines, write a letter to the Agriculture Minister in your own words telling him how the use of chemical fertilisers can be harmful. Table 1.2: Production of pulses and wheat ( in Million Tonnes) minerals which dissolve in water and are immediately available to plants. But these may not be retained in the Higher yields were possible only from a combination of HYV seeds, irrigation, chemical fertilisers, pesticides, etc. Farmers of Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh were the first to try out the modern farming method in India. The farmers in these regions set up tubewells for irrigation, and made use of HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers and pesticides in farming. Some of them bought farm machinery, like tractors and threshers, which made ploughing and harvesting faster. They were rewarded with high yields of wheat. In Palampur, the yield of wheat grown from the traditional varieties was 1300 kg per hectare. With HYV seeds, the yield went up to 3200 kg per hectare. There was a large increase in the production of wheat. Farmers now had greater amounts of surplus wheat to sell in the markets. What is the difference between multiple cropping and modern farming method? The following table shows the production of wheat and pulses in India after the Green Revolution in units of million tonnes. Plot this on a graph. Was the Green Revolution equally successful for both the crops? Discuss. What is the working capital required by the farmer using modern farming Source: AS & E Division, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in Economic Survey 2023 24, Statistical Appendix. 1965 - 66 1970 - 71 1980 - 81 1990 - 91 2000 - 01 2010 - 11 2012 - 13 2013 - 14 2014 - 15 2015 - 16 2016 - 17 2017 - 18 2018 - 19 2019 - 20 2020 - 21 2021 - 22 2022 - 23 2023 - 24 Picture 1.5  Palampur village: Distribution of cultivated land 4. How is land distributed between the farmers of Palampur? You must have realised how important land is for farming. Unfortunately, not all the people engaged in agriculture have sufficient land for cultivation. In Palampur, about one third of the 450 families are landless, i.e. 150 families, most of them dalits, have no land for cultivation. Of the remaining families who own soil for long. They may escape from the soil and pollute groundwater, rivers and lakes. Chemical fertilizers can also kill bacteria and other micro- organisms in the soil. This means some time after their use, the soil will before....(Source: Down to Earth, New.....The consumption of chemical fertilizers in Punjab is highest in the country. The continuous use of chemical fertilizers has led to degradation of soil health. Punjab farmers are now forced to use more and more chemical fertilizers and other inputs to achieve the same production level. This means cost of cultivation is rising very land, 240 families cultivate small plots of land less than 2 hectares in size. Cultivation of such plots doesn t bring adequate income to the farmer family. In 1960, Gobind was a farmer with 2.25 hectares of largely unirrigated land. With the help of his three sons Gobind cultivated the land. Though they didn t live very comfortably, the family managed to feed itself with a little bit of extra income from one buffalo that the family possessed. Some years after Gobind s death, this land was divided among his three sons. Each one now has a plot of land that is only 0.75 hectare in size. Even with improved irrigation and modern farming method, Gobind s sons are not able to make a living from their land. They have to look for additional work during part of the year. ou can see the large number of small plots scattered around the village in the picture. These are cultivated by the small farmers. On the other hand, more than half the area of the village is covered by plots that are quite large in size. In Palampur, there are 60 families of medium and large farmers who cultivate more than 2 hectares of land. A few of the large farmers have land extending over 10 hectares or more. The Story of Village Palampur In the Picture 1.5, can you shade the land cultivated by the small farmers? Why do so many families of farmers cultivate such small plots of land? The distribution of farmers in India and the amount of land they cultivate is given in the following Graph 1.1. Discuss in Graph 1.1:  Distribution of Cultivated Area Would you agree that the distribution of cultivated land is unequal in Palampur? Do you find a similar situation for India? Explain. 5. Who will provide the labour? After land, labour is the next necessary factor for production. Farming requires a great deal of hard work. Small farmers along with their families cultivate their own fields. Thus, they provide the labour required for farming themselves. Medium and large farmers hire farm labourers to work on their fields. Identify the work being done on the field in the Pictures 1.6 and arrange them in a proper sequence. Farm labourers come either from landless families or families cultivating small plots of land. Unlike farmers, farm labourers do not have a right over the Picture 1.6 Work on the fields: Wheat crop  ploughing by bullocks, sowing, spraying of by traditional method, cultivation by modern method, and cutting of Source: Pocket Book of Agriculture Statistics 2020 and State of Indian Agriculture 2020, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Medium, Semi-Medium & crops grown on the land. Instead they are paid wages by the farmer for whom they work. Wages can be in cash or in kind e.g. crop. Sometimes labourers get meals also. Wages vary widely from region to region, from crop to crop, from one farm activity to another (like sowing and harvesting). There is also a wide variation in the duration of employment. A farm Picture 1.7 The conversation between Dala and Ramkali labourer might be employed on a daily basis, or for one particular farm activity like harvesting, or for the whole year. Dala is a landless farm labourer who works on daily wages in Palampur. This means he must regularly look for work. The minimum wages for a farm labourer set by the government is Rs 300  per day (March 2019), but Dala gets only Rs 160. There is Dala and Ramkali are among the poorest native of the village The Story of Village Palampur heavy competition for work among the farm labourers in Palampur, so people agree to work for lower wages. Dala complains about his situation to Ramkali, who is another farm labourer. Both Dala and Ramkali are among the poorest people in the village. Why are farm labourers like Dala and Gosaipur and Majauli are two villages in North Bihar. Out of a total of 850 households in the two villages, there are more than 250 men who are employed in rural Punjab and Haryana or in Delhi, Mumbai, Surat, Hyderabad or Nagpur. Such migration is common in most villages across India. Why do people migrate? Can you describe (based on your imagination) the work that the migrants of Gosaipur and Majauli might do at the place of 6. The capital needed in farming ou have already seen that the modern farming methods require a great deal of capital, so that the farmer now needs more money than before. 1. Most small farmers have to borrow money to arrange for the capital. They borrow from large farmers or the village moneylenders or the traders who supply various inputs for cultivation. The rate of interest on such loans is very high. They are put to great distress to repay the loan. Savita is a small farmer. She plans to cultivate wheat on her 1 hectare of land. Besides seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, she needs cash to buy instruments. She estimates that the working capital itself would cost a minimum of Rs 3,000. She doesn t have the money, so she decides to borrow from Tejpal Singh, a large farmer. Tejpal Singh agrees to give Savita the loan at an interest rate of 24 per cent for four months, which is a very high interest rate. Savita also has to promise to work on his field as a farm labourer during the harvest season at Rs 100 per day. As you can tell, this wage is quite low. Savita knows that she will have to work very hard to complete harvesting on her own field, and then work as a farm labourer for Tejpal Singh. The harvest time is a very busy time. As a mother of three children she has a lot of household responsibilities. Savita agrees to these tough conditions as she knows getting a loan is difficult for a small farmer 2. In contrast to the small farmers, the medium and large farmers have their own savings from farming. They are thus able to arrange for the capital needed. How do these farmers have their own savings? Y ou shall find the answer in the next section. Let's discuss the story so far.... We have read about the three factors of production land, labour and capital  and how they are used in farming. Let us fill in the blanks given below. Among the three factors of production, we found that labour is the most abundant factor of production. There are many people who are willing to work as farm labourers in the villages, whereas the opportunities of work are limited. They belong to either landless families or. They are paid low wages, and lead a difficult life. In contrast to labour, is a scarce factor of production. Cultivated land area is even the existing land is distributed the people engaged in farming. There are a large number of small farmers who cultivate small plots of land and live in conditions not much better than the landless farm labourer. To make the maximum use of the existing land,. Both these have led to increase in production of crops. Modern farming methods require a great deal of farmers usually need to borrow money to arrange for the capital, and are put to great distress to repay the loan. Therefore, capital too is a scarce factor of production, particularly for the small farmers. Though both land and capital are scarce, there is a basic difference between is a natural resource, is man-made. It is possible to increase capital, whereas land is fixed. Therefore, it is very important that we take good care of land and other natural resources used in 7. Sale of Surplus Farm Products Let us suppose that the farmers have produced wheat on their lands using the three factors of production. The wheat is harvested and production is complete. What do the farmers do with the wheat? They retain a part of the wheat for the family s consumption and sell the surplus wheat. Small farmers like Savita and Gobind s sons have little surplus wheat because their total production is small and from this a substantial share is kept for their own family needs. So it is the medium and large farmers who supply wheat to the market. In the Picture 1.1, you can see the bullock cart streaming into the market each carrying loads of wheat. The traders at the market buy the wheat and sell it further to shopkeepers in the towns and Tejpal Singh, the large farmer, has a surplus of 350 quintals of wheat from all his lands! He sells the surplus wheat at the Raiganj market and has good earnings. What does Tejpal Singh do with his earnings? Last year, Tejpal Singh had put most of the money in his bank account. Later he used the savings for lending to farmers like Savita who were in need of a loan. He also used the savings to arrange for the working capital for farming in the next season. This year Tejpal Singh plans to use his earnings to buy another tractor. Another tractor would increase his fixed Like Tejpal Singh, other large and medium farmers sell the surplus farm products. A part of the earnings is saved and kept for buying capital for the next season. Thus, they are able to arrange for the capital for farming from their own savings. Some farmers might also use the savings to buy cattle, trucks, or to set up shops. As we shall see, these constitute the capital for non-farm activities. Non-Farm Activities in Palampur We have learnt about farming as the main production activity in Palampur. We shall now take a look at some of the non-farm production activities. Only 25 per cent of the people working in Palampur are engaged in activities other than 1. Dairy   the other common Dairy is a common activity in many families. People feed their buffalos on various kinds of grass and the jowar and bajra that grows during the rainy season. The milk is sold in Raiganj, the nearby large village. Two traders from Shahpur town have set up collection cum chilling centres at Raiganj from where the milk is transported to far away towns and cities. The Story of Village Palampur Let us take three farmers. Each has grown wheat on his field though the production is different (see Column 2). The consumption of wheat by each farmer family is the same (Column 3). The whole of surplus wheat this year is used as capital for next year s production. Also suppose, production is twice the capital used in production. Complete the tables. Capital for the Capital for the Capital for the Compare the production of wheat by the three farmers over the years. What happens to Farmer 3 in Y ear 3? Can he continue production? What will he have to do to continue production? 2. An example of small-scale manufacturing in Palampur At present, less than fifty people are engaged in manufacturing in Palampur. Unlike the manufacturing that takes place in the big factories in the towns and cities, manufacturing in Palampur involves very simple production methods mechanical sugarcane crushing machine run on electricity and has set it up on his field. Sugarcane crushing was earlier done with the help of bullocks, but people prefer to do it by machines these days. Mishrilal also buys sugarcane from other farmers and processes it into jaggery. The jaggery is then sold to traders at Shahpur. In the process, Mishrilal makes a small profit. and are done on a small scale. They are carried out mostly at home or in the fields with the help of family labour. Rarely are What capital did Mishrilal need to set up his jaggery manufacturing unit? Who provides the labour in this case? Can you guess why Mishrilal is unable to increase his profit? Could you think of any reasons when he might face a loss? Why does Mishrilal sell his jaggery to traders in Shahpur and not in his 3. The shopkeepers of Palampur People involved in trade (exchange of goods) are not many in Palampur. The traders of Palampur are shopkeepers who buy various goods from wholesale markets in the cities and sell them in the village. You will see small general stores in the village selling a wide range of items like rice, wheat, sugar, tea, oil, biscuits, soap, toothpaste, batteries, candles, notebooks, pen, pencil, even some cloth. A few of the families whose houses are close to the bus stand have used a part of the space to open small shops. They sell eatables. In what ways is Kareem s capital and labour different from Mishrilal s? Why didn t someone start a computer centre earlier? Discuss the possible 4. Transport: a fast developing There are variety of vehicles on the road connecting Palampur to Raiganj. Rickshawallahs, tongawallahs, jeep, tractor, truck drivers and people driving the traditional bullock cart and bogey are people in the transport services. They ferry people and goods from one place to another, and in return get paid for it. The number of people involved in transport has grown over the last several years. Kareem has opened a computer class centre in the village. In recent years a large number of students have been attending college in Shahpur town. Kareem found that a number of students from the village are also attending computer classes in the town. There were two women in the village who had a degree in computer applications. He decided to employ them. He bought computers and set up the classes in the front room of their house overlooking the market. High school students have started attending them in good numbers. Kishora is a farm labourer. Like other such labourers, Kishora found it difficult to meet his family s needs from the wages that he received. A few years back Kishora took a loan from the bank. This was under a government programme which was giving cheap loans to poor landless households. Kishora bought a buffalo with this money. He now sells the buffalo s milk. The Story of Village Palampur What is Kishora s fixed capital? What do you think would be his In how many production activities is Would you say that K ishora has benefitted from better roads in, he has attached a wooden cart to his buffalo and uses it to transport various items. Once a week, he goes to the river Ganga to bring back clay for the potter. Or sometimes he goes to Shahpur with a load of jaggery or other commodities. Every month he gets some work in transport. As a result, Kishora is able to earn more than what he used to do some years back. Farming is the main production activity in the village. Over the years there have been many important changes in the way farming is practiced. These have allowed the farmers to produce more crops from the same amount of land. This is an important achievement, since land is fixed and scarce. But in raising production a great deal of pressure has been put on land and other natural resources. The new ways of farming need less land, but much more of capital. The medium and large farmers are able to use their own savings from production to arrange for capital during the next season. On the other hand, the small farmers who constitute about 80 per cent of total farmers in India, find it difficult to obtain capital. Because of the small size of their plots, their production is not enough. The lack of surplus means that they are unable to obtain capital from their own savings, and have to borrow. Besides the debt, many of the small farmers have to do additional work as farm labourers to feed themselves and their families. Labour being the most abundant factor of production, it would be ideal if new ways of farming used much more labour. Unfortunately, such a thing has not happened. The use of labour on farms is limited. The labour, looking for opportunities is thus migrating to neighbouring villages, towns and cities. Some labour has entered the non-farm sector in the village. At present, the non-farm sector in the village is not very large. Out of every 100 workers in the rural areas in India, only 24 are engaged in non-farm activities. Though there is a variety of non-farm activities in the villages (we have only seen a few examples), the number of people employed in each is quite small. In the future, one would like to see more non-farm production activities in the village. Unlike farming, non-farm activities require little land. People with some amount of capital can set up non-farm activities. How does one obtain this capital? One can either use his own savings, but more often has to take a loan. It is important that loan be available at low rate of interest so that even people without savings can start some non-farm activity. Another thing which is essential for expansion of non-farm activities is to have markets where the goods and services produced can be sold. In Palampur, we saw the neighbouring villages, towns and cities provide the markets for milk, jaggery, wheat, etc. As more villages get connected to towns and cities through good roads, transport and telephone, it is possible that the opportunities for non-farm activities in the village would increase in the coming years. 1. Every village in India is surveyed once in ten years during the Census and some of details are presented in the following format. Fill up the following based on information on Palampur. TOTAL AREA OF THE VILLAGE: LAND USE (in hectares): 2. Modern farming methods require more inputs which are manufactured in industry. Do you agree? 3. How did the spread of electricity help farmers in Palampur? 4. Is it important to increase the area under irrigation? Why? 5. Construct a table on the distribution of land among the 450 families of 6. Why are the wages for farm labourers in Palampur less than minimum wages? 7. In your region, talk to two labourers. Choose either farm labourers or labourers working at construction sites. What wages do they get? Are they paid in cash or kind? Do they get work regularly? Are they in debt? 8. What are the different ways of increasing production on the same piece of land? Use examples to explain. 9. Describe the work of a farmer with 1 hectare of land. 10. How do the medium and large farmers obtain capital for farming? How is it different from the small farmers? 11. On what terms did Savita get a loan from Tajpal Singh? Would Savita  be different if she could get a loan from the bank at a low rate of interest? 12. Talk to some old residents in your region and write a short report on the changes in irrigation and changes in production methods during the last 30 years. Land not available for cultivation (Area covering dwellings, roads, ponds, grazing ground) The Story of Village Palampur 13. What are the non-farm production activities taking place in your region? Make a short list. 14. What can be done so that more non-farm production activities can be started ETIENNE, GILBERT. 1985. Rural Development in Asia: Meetings with Peasants, Sage Publications, New Delhi. ETIENNE, GILBERT. 1988. Food and Poverty: India s Half  Won Battle, Sage Publications, RAJ, K.N. 1991.  Village India and its Political Economy  in C.T. Kurien (Edited) Economy, Society and Development, Sage Publications, New Delhi THORNER, DANIEL AND ALICE THORNER. 1962. Land and Labour in India, Asia  Publishing http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/policy/government-hikes- -agriculture-labourer/articleshow/57408252.cms The chapter 'People as Resource' is an effort to explain population as an asset for the economy rather than a liability. Population becomes human capital when there is investment made in the form of education, training and medical care. In fact, human capital is the stock of skill and productive knowledge embodied 'People as Resource' is a way of referring to a country s working people in terms of their existing productive skills and abilities. Looking at the population from this productive aspect emphasises its ability to contribute to the creation of the Gross National Product. Like other resources population also is a resource   a 'human resource'. This is the positive side of a large population that is often overlooked when we look only at the negative side, considering only the problems of providing the population with food, education and access to health facilities. When the existing 'human resource' is further developed by becoming more educated and healthy, we call it 'human capital formation' that adds to the productive power of the country just like 'physical capital formation'. (through education, training, medical care) yields a return just like investment in physical capital. This can be seen directly in the form of higher incomes earned because of higher productivity of the more educated or the better trained persons, as well as the higher productivity of healthier people. People as Resource India s Green Revolution is a dramatic example of how the input of greater knowledge in the form of improved production technologies can rapidly increase the productivity of scarce land resources. India s IT revolution is a striking instance of how the importance of human capital has come to acquire a higher position than that of material, plant and Source: Planning Commission, Govt. of India. People as Resource People as Resource Not only do the more educated and the healthier people gain through higher incomes, society also gains in other indirect ways because the advantages of a more educated or a healthier population spreads to those also who themselves were not directly educated or given health care. In fact, human capital is in one way superior to other resources like land and physical capital: human resource can make use of land and capital. Land and capital cannot become useful on its own! For many decades in India, a large population has been considered a liability rather than an asset. But a large Looking at the photograph can you explain how a doctor, teacher, engineer and a tailor are an asset to the population need not be a burden for the economy. It can be turned into a productive asset by investment in human capital (for example, by spending resources on education and health for all, training of industrial and agricultural workers in the use of modern technology, useful scientific researches and so on). The two following cases illustrate how people can try to become a more productive Story of Sakal There were two friends Vilas and Sakal living in the same village Semapur. Sakal was a twelve-year- old boy. His mother Sheela looked after domestic chores. His father Buta Chaudhary worked in an agricultural field. Sakal helped his mother in domestic chores. He also looked after his younger brother Jeetu and sister Seetu. His uncle Shyam had passed the matriculation examination, but, was sitting idle in the house as he had no job. Buta and Sheela were eager to teach Sakal. They forced him to join the village school which he soon joined. He started studying and completed his higher secondary examination. His father persuaded him to continue his studies. He raised a loan for Sakal to study a vocational course in computers. Sakal was meritorious and interested in studies from the beginning. With great vigour and enthusiasm he completed his course. After some time he got a job in a private firm. He even designed a new kind of software. This software helped him increase the sale of the firm. His boss acknowledged his services and rewarded him with a Story of Vilas Vilas was an eleven-year old boy residing in the same village as Sakal. Vilas s father Mahesh was a fisherman. His father passed away when he was only two years old. His mother Geeta sold fish to earn money to feed the family. She bought fish from the landowner s pond and sold it in the nearby mandi. She could earn only Rs 150 a day by selling fish. Vilas became a patient of arthritis. His mother could not afford to take him to the doctor. He could not go to school either. He was not interested in studies. He helped his mother in cooking and also looked after his younger brother Mohan. After some time his mother fell sick and there was no one to look after her. There was no one in the family to support them. Vilas, too, was forced to sell fish in the same village. He like his mother earned only a meagre Do you notice any difference between the two friends? What are those? Picture 2.2  Stories of Vilas and Sakal Visit a nearby village or a slum area and write down a case study of a boy or girl of your age facing the same condition as Vilas or Sakal. In the two case studies we saw Sakal went to school and Vilas did not go. Sakal was physically strong and healthy. There was no need for him to visit the doctor frequently. Vilas was a patient of arthritis. He lacked the means to visit the doctor. Sakal acquired a degree in computer programming. Sakal found a job in a private firm while Vilas continued with the same work as his mother. He earned a meagre income like his mother to support a family. In the case of Sakal, several years of education added to the quality of labour. This enhanced his total productivity. Total productivity adds to the growth of the economy. This in turn pays an People as Resource individual through salary or in some other form of his choice. In case of Vilas, there could not be any education or health care in the early part of his life. He spends his life selling fish like his mother. Henceforth, he draws the same salary of unskilled labourer as his mother. Investment in human resource (via education and medical care) can give high rates of return in future. This investment on people is the same as investment in land and capital. A child, too, with investments made on her education and health, can yield a high return in future in the form of contribution to the society. Educated parents are found to invest more heavily on the education of their child. This is because they have realised the importance of education for themselves. They are also conscious of proper nutrition and hygiene. They accordingly look after their children s needs for education at school and good health. A virtuous cycle is, thus, created in this case. In contrast, a vicious cycle may be created by disadvantaged parents, who themselves uneducated and lacking in hygiene, keep their children in a similarly disadvantaged state. Countries, like Japan, have invested in human resource. They did not have any natural resource. These countries are developed/rich. They import the natural resource needed in their country. How did they become rich/developed? They have invested on people, especially in the field of education and health. These people have made efficient use of other resources, like land and capital. Efficiency and the technology evolved by people have made these countries rich/developed. Economic Activities by Men and Women Like Vilas and Sakal, people have been engaged in various activities. We saw that Vilas sold fish and Sakal got a job in the firm. The various activities have been classified into three main sectors i.e., primary, secondary and tertiary. Primary sector includes agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fishing, poultry Manufacturing is included in the secondary sector. Trade, transport, communication, banking, education, health, tourism, services, insurance, etc. are included in the tertiary sector. The activities in this sector result in the production of goods and services. These activities add value to the national income. These activities are called economic activities. Economic activities have two parts   market activities and non-market activities. Market activities involve remuneration to anyone who performs i.e., activity performed for pay or profit. These include production of goods or services, including government service. Non-market activities are the production for self-consumption. These can be Picture 2.3 Based on the picture can you classify these activities into three sectors? consumption and processing of primary product and own account production of Education helps individual to make better use of the economic opportunities available before him. Education and skill are the major determinants of the earning of any individual in the market. A majority of women have meagre education and low skill formation. Women are paid low compared to men. Most women work where job security is not there. Various activities relating to legal protection is meagre. Employment in this sector is characterised by irregular and low income. In this sector there is an absence of basic facilities like maternity leave, childcare and other social security systems. However, women with high education and skill formation are paid at par with the men. Among the organised sector, teaching and medicine attract them the most. Some women have entered administrative and other services including job, that need high levels of scientific and technological competence. Ask your sister or your classmate what she would like to take up as a career? Quality of Population The quality of population depends upon the literacy rate, health of a person indicated by life expectancy and skill formation acquired by the people of the country. The quality of the poulation ultimately decides the growth rate of the country. Literate and healthy population are an asset. s education in the initial years of his life bore him the fruits in the later years in terms of a good job and salary We saw education was an important  input for the growth of Sakal. It opened new horizon for him, provided new aspiration and developed values of life. Not only for Sakal, education contributes towards the growth of society also. It enhances the Due to historical and cultural reasons there is a division of labour between men and women in the family. Women generally look after domestic chores and men work in the fields. Sakal s mother Sheela cooks food, cleans utensils, washes clothes, cleans the house and looks after her children. Sakal s father Buta cultivates the field, sells the produce in the market and earns money for the family. Sheela is not paid for the services delivered for upbringing of the family. Buta earns money, which he spends on rearing his family. Women are not paid for their service delivered in the family. The household work done by women is not recognised in the National Income. Geeta, mother of Vilas, earned an income by selling fish. Thus women are paid for their work when they enter the labour market. Their earning like that of their male counterpart is determined on the basis of education and skill. Visit a village or colony located near to your residential area and note undertaken by the people of that village or colony. If this is not possible, ask your neighbour what is their profession? In which of the three sectors will you categorise their work? Say whether these activities are economic or non-economic activities: Vilas sells fish in the village market. Vilas cooks food for his family. Sakal works in the private firm. Sakal looks after his younger brother People as Resource...human being is a positive asset and a precious national resource which needs to be cherished, nurtured and developed with tenderness and care, coupled with dynamism. Each individual s growth presents a different range of problems and requirements.... The catalytic action of education in this complex and dynamic growth process needs to be planned meticulously and executed with great sensitivity. Study the graph and answer the following 1. Has the literacy rates of the population increased since 1951? 2. In which year India has the highest 3. Why literacy rate is high among the males of India? 4. Why are women less educated than men? 5. How would you calculate literacy rate 6. What is your projection about India s literacy rate in 2025? Source: National Education Policy, 1986. elementary education with a special emphasis on girls. There is also an establishment of pace setting of schools like Navodaya Vidyalaya in each district. Vocational streams have been developed to equip large number of high school students with occupations related to knowledge and skills. The plan outlay on education has increased from Rs 151 crore in the first plan to Rs 99,300 crore in 2020 21. The expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP rose from 0.64% in 1951 52 to 3.1% in 2019 20 (B.E.)  and has remained stagnant around 3% from past few years. The Budgetary Estimate Source: Census of India, Office of Registrar General, India, Graph 2.1: Trends in Literacy Rates In Post-Independent India Picture 2.4 School children national income, cultural richness and increases the efficiency of governance. There is a provision made for providing universal access, retention and quality in Count the number of boys and girls studying in your school or in your neighbouring co-ed school. Ask the school administrator to provide you with the data of boys and girls studying in the classroom. Study the difference if any and explain for reasons in the classroom. as stated in the Budget Documents of Union State Governments, Reserve Bank of India, the expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP has  declined to 2.8% in 2020 21 (B.E.) The literacy rates have increased from 18% in 1951 to 85% in 2018. Literacy is not only a right, it is also needed if the citizens are to perform their duties and enjoy their rights properly. However, a vast difference is noticed across different sections of the population. Literacy among males is nearly 16.1% higher than females and it is about 14.2% higher in urban areas as compared to rural areas. As per 2011 census, literacy rates varied from 94% in Kerala to 62% in Bihar. The primary school system (I V) has expanded to over 7,78,842 lakh in 2019 20. Unfortunately, this huge expansion of schools has been diluted by the poor quality of schooling and high dropout rates. Samagra Shiksha is a significant step for the school education sector extending from pre-school to Class effectiveness measured in terms of equal opportunities for schooling and equitable learning outcomes. The scheme envisages the  school  as the continuum from pre-school, primary, middle to secondary levels and attempts to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education from pre-school to secondary stage in accordance with the Sustainable Develompent Goals. Mid-day meal scheme has been implemented to encourage attendance and retention of children and improve their nutritional status. These policies could add to the literate population of India. The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education in the age group of 18 to 23 years is 27% in 2020 21, which would be broadly in line with world average. The strategy focuses on increasing  access, quality, adoption of state-specific curriculum modification, vocationalisation and networking on the use of information technology. There is also focus on distance education, convergence of formal, non-formal, distance and IT education institutions. Source: UGC Annual Report 2019-20 and Selected Educational Statistics, Ministry of HRD. www.ugc.ac.in_Annual Report.2022 23.pdf *   Provisional Data from All India Survey on Higher Education, 2017 18, 2018 19. *   Enrolment estimated simple average increase during the last five year. Table 2.1: Number of Institutions of Higher Education, Enrolment and Faculty Number of             Students 1950   51 1990   91 1998   99 1,074 (as in 2023) 1,085 (as in 2023) 41,843,704 in 2021-22   15,10,957 in 2021-22 People as Resource Over the past 60 years, there has been a significant growth in the number of university and institutions of higher learning in specialised areas. Let us read the table to see the increase in the number of college, universities, enrolment of students and recruitment of teachers from 1951 to 2019 20. Discuss this table in the classroom and answer the following questions. 1. Is the increase in the number of colleges adequate to admit the increasing number of students? 2. Do you think we should have more number of universities? 3. What is the increase noticed among the teachers in the year 2015 16. 4. What is your idea about future colleges Firm maximise profit: Do you think any firm would be induced to employ people who might not work efficiently as healthy workers because of ill health? The health of a person helps him to realise his/her potential and the ability to fight illness. He/She will not be able Children standing in queue for to maximise his/her output to the overall growth of the organisation. Indeed; health is an indispensable basis for realising one s well-being. Henceforth, improvement in the health status of the population has been the priority of the country. Our national policy, too, aims at improving the accessibility of healthcare, family welfare and nutritional service with a special focus on the underprivileged segment of the population. Over the last five decades, India has built a vast healt infrastructure and has also developed the manpower required at primary, secondary and tertiary sector in government, as well as, in the private sector. Source: National Health Profile, 2021, 2022 Human Development Report, UNDP mohfw.gov.in (office of Registrar General & Census Commission, India MoHA (accessed on 29.09.2021, 6.02.2024) * Infant mortality rate is the death of a child below one year of age. ** Birth rates is the number of babies born  for every 1,000 people during a particular period of time. *** Death rate is the number of people per 1,000 who die during a particular period of time. Study Table 2.2 and answer the following 1. What is the percentage increase in dispensaries from 1951 to 2020? 2. What is the percentage increase in doctors and nursing personnel from 1951 to 2020? These measures, which have been adopted, have increased the life expectancy to over 67.2 years in 2021. *Infant mortality rate (IMR) has come down from 147 in 1951 to 28 in 2020. **Crude birth rates have dropped to 20.0 (2020) and ***death rates to 6 (2020) within the same duration of time. Increase in life expectancy and improvement in childcare are useful in assessing the future progress of the country. Increase in longevity of life is an indicator of good quality of life marked by self-confidence. Reduction in infant mortality involves the protection of children from infection, ensuring the nutrition of both the mother and the child, and childcare. Sakal s mother Sheela looked after the domestic chores, children and helped her husband Buta in the field. Sakal s brother, Jeetu, and sister, Seetu, spend their time playing and roaming. Can you unemployed? If not, why? Unemployment is said to exist when people who are willing to work at the going wages cannot find jobs. Sheela is not interested in working outside her Visit a nearby hospital, either government or private and note down the following details. How many beds are there in the hospital you have visited? 3. Do you think the increase in the number of doctors and nurses is adequate for India? If not, why? 4. What other facilities would you like to provide in a hospital? 5. Discuss about the hospital you have 6. Can you draw a graph using this table. There are many places in India which do not have even these basic facilities. There are only 542 medical colleges in the country and 313 dental colleges. Just four states, like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharastra and Tamil Nadu have the maximum number of medical colleges. Abbreviation(s): SC: Sub centre, PHC: Primary Health Centre, CHC: Community Health Centre. ANM: Auxiliary Nurse Hydrides, RN&RM: Registered Nurses & Registered Midwives, LHV: Lady Health Visitors. Source: National Health Policy, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2020, 2022, Central Bureau of Health Intelligence, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Table 2.2: Health infrastructure over the years How many doctors are there in the How many nurses work in that Besides, try to gather the following How many hospitals are there in your How many dispensaries are there in with the State 2,621,981 2,639,229 2,778,248 People as Resource domestic domain. Jeetu and Seetu are too small to be counted in the work force population. Neither Jeetu, Seetu or Sheela can be counted as unemployed. The workforce population includes people from 15 years to 59 years. Sakal s brother and sister do not fall within this age group so they cannot be called unemployed. Sakal s mother Sheela works for the family. She is not willing to work outside her domestic domain for payment. She too cannot be called unemployed. Sakal s grandparents (although not mentioned in the story) cannot be called unemployed. In case of India we have unemployment in rural and urban areas. However, the nature of unemployment differs in rural and urban areas. In case of rural areas, there is seasonal and disguised unemployment. Urban areas have mostly Seasonal unemployment happens when people are not able to find jobs during some months of the year. People dependant upon agriculture usually face such kind of problem. There are certain busy seasons when sowing, harvesting, weeding and threshing is done. Certain months do not provide much work to the people dependant on agriculture. In case of disguised unemployment people appear to be employed. They have agricultural plot where they find work. This usually happens among family members engaged in agricultural activity. The work requires the service of five people but engages eight people. Three people are extra. These three people also work in the same plot as the others. The contribution made by the three extra people does not add to the contribution made by the five people. If three people are removed the productivity of the field will not decline. The field requires the service of five people and the three extra people are disguised unemployed. In case of urban areas educated unemployment has become a common matriculation, graduation and post graduation degrees are not able to find job. A study showed that unemployment of graduate and post-graduate has matriculates. A paradoxical manpower situation is witnessed as surplus of manpower in certain categories coexist with shortage of manpower in others. technically qualified person on one hand, while there is a dearth of technical skills required for economic growth. Unemployment leads to wastage of manpower resource. People who are an asset for the economy turn into a liability. There is a feeling of hopelessness and despair among the youth. People do not have enough money to support their family. Inability of educated people who are willing to work to find gainful employment implies a great social waste. Unemployment tends to increase economic overload. The dependence of the unemployed on the working population increases. The quality of life of an individual as well as of society is adversely affected. When a family has to live on a bare subsistence level there is a general decline in its health status and rising withdrawal from the school system. Hence, unemployment has detrimental impact on the overall growth of an economy. Increase in unemployment is an indicator of a depressed economy. It also wastes the resource, which could have been gainfully employed. If people cannot be used as a resource they naturally appear as a liability to the economy. In case of India, statistically, the unemployment rate is low. A large number of people represented with low income and productivity are counted as throughout the year but in terms of their potential and income, it is not adequate for them. The work that they are pursuing seems forced upon them. They may therefore want other work of their choice. Poor people cannot afford to sit idle. They tend to engage in any activity irrespective of its earning potential. Their earning keeps them on a bare subsistence level. the secondary or the tertiary sector. In the secondary sector, small scale manufacturing is the most labour- absorbing. In case of the tertiary sector, various new services are now appearing like biotechnology, information technology and so on. Let us read a story to know how people could become an asset for the economy of Story of a Village There was a village inhabited by several families. Each family produced enough to feed its members. Each family met its needs by the members making their own clothes and teaching their own children. One of the families decided to send one of its sons to an agriculture college. The boy got his admission in the nearby college of agriculture. After some time he became qualified in agro- engineering and came back to the village. He proved to be so creative that he could design an improved type of plough, which increased the yield of wheat. Thus a new job of agro- engineer was created and filled in the village. The family in the village sold the surplus in a nearby neighbouring village. They earned good profit, themselves. Inspired by this success all the families after some time held a meeting in the village. They all wanted to have a better future for their children too. They requested the panchayat to open a school in the village. They assured the panchayat that they would all send their children to school. The panchayat, with the help of government, opened a school. A teacher was recruited from a nearby town. All the children of this village started going to school. After sometime one of the families gave training to his daughter in Moreover, the employment structure is characterised by self-employment in the primary sector. The whole family contributes in the field even though not everybody is really needed. So there is agriculture sector. But the entire family shares what has been produced. This concept of sharing of work in the field and the produce raised reduces the hardship of unemployment in the rural sector. But this does not reduce the poverty of the family, gradually surplus labour from every household tends to migrate from the village in search of jobs. Let us discuss about the employment scenario in the three sectors mentioned earlier. Agriculture, is the most labour absorbing sector of the economy. In recent years, there has been a decline in the dependence of population on agriculture partly because of disguised unemployment discussed earlier. Some of the surplus labour in agriculture has moved to either Picture 2.6  Can you remember how much did you pay when you asked him to mend your shoes or slippers? People as Resource tailoring. She started stitching clothes for all the families of the village for everyone now wanted to buy and wear well-tailored clothes. Thus another new job, that of a tailor was created. This had another positive effect. The time of the farmers in going far for buying clothes was saved. As the farmers spent more time in the field, the yield of the farms went up. This was the beginning of prosperity. The farmers had more than what they could consume. Now they could sell what they produced to others who came to their village markets. Over time, this village, which formally had no job opportunities in the beginning, had many like teacher, tailor, agro  engineer and many more. This was the story of a simple village where the rising level of human capital enabled it to evolve into a place rich with complex and modern economic 1. What do you understand by 'people as a resource'? 2. How is human resource different from other resources like land and physical 3. What is the role of education in human capital formation? 4. What is the role of health in human capital formation? 5. What part does health play in the individual s working life? 6. What are the various activities undertaken in the primary sector, secondary sector and tertiary sector? 7. What is the difference between economic activities and non-economic activities? 8. Why are women employed in low paid work? 9. How will you explain the term unemployment? 10. What is the difference between disguised unemployment and seasonal 11. Why is educated unemployed, a peculiar problem of India? 12. In which field do you think India can build the maximum employment 13. Can you suggest some measures in the education system to mitigate the problem of the educated unemployed? 14. Can you imagine some village which initially had no job opportunities but later came up with many? 15. Which capital would you consider the best   land, labour, physical capital and human capital? Why? ou have seen how inputs like education and health helped in making people an asset for the economy. The chapter also discusses about the economic activities undertaken in the three sectors of the economy. We also study about the problem associated with unemployment. Finally the chapter ends with the story of a village which formally had no job but later had plenty. GARY, S. BECKER. 1966. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to Education, General Series. Number 80. New Y Bureau of Economic Research.. SCHULTZ. 'Investment in Human Capital'. American Economic  Review. Economic Survey 2015 2016.  Ministry of Finance, Government of India, New Delhi. India Vision 2020. The Report. Planning Commission. Government of India, Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002 2007).  Planning Commission, Part II. New Delhi. Tenth Five Year Plan ( 2002 2007). Planning Commission, New Delhi. Twelth Five Year Plan ( 2012 2017). Planning Commission, New Delhi. NCERT. 2016. Trilingual Dictionary of Economics, p. 62. Poverty as a Challenge This chapter deals with one of the challenges faced by independent India  poverty. After discussing this multi- dimensional problem through examples, the chapter discusses the way poverty is analysed by social scientists. Poverty trends in India and the world are illustrated through the concept of the poverty line. Causes of poverty as well as anti-poverty measures taken by the government are also discussed. The chapter ends with broadening the official concept of poverty into human poverty. In our daily life, we come across many people who we think are poor. They could be landless labourers in villages or people living in overcrowded jhuggis cities. NITI Aayog uses Multidimensional Poverty as a Challenge Poverty Index to analyse the problem of poverty faced by the country. The ratio of multidimensional poverty has fallen from approximately 55 per cent in 2005 06, 25 per cent in 2015 16 and to 15 per cent in 2019 21. It is also expected that multidimensional poverty will soon reach single digit. Two Typical Cases of Poverty Thirty-three year old Ram Saran works as a daily-wage labourer in a wheat flour mill near Ranchi in Jharkhand. He manages to earn around `3,500 a month when he finds employment, which is not often. The money is not enough to sustain his family of six  his Poverty as a Challenge Picture 3.1  Story  of Ram Saran wife and four children aged between 12 years to six months. He has to send money home to his old parents who live in a village near Ramgarh. His father, a landless labourer, and his brother who lives in Hazaribagh depend on Ram Saran for sustenance. Ram Saran lives in a one-room rented house in a crowded basti in the outskirts of the city. It is a temporary shack built of bricks and clay tiles. His wife Santa Devi, works as a part time maid in a few houses and manages to earn another `1500. They manage a meagre meal of dal and rice twice a day, but there is never enough for all of them. His elder son works as a helper in a tea shop to supplement the family s income and earns another `700 while his 10-year old daughter goes to school and takes care of the younger siblings. They have only two pairs of hand-me- down clothes each. New ones are bought only when the old clothes become unwearable. Shoes are a luxury. The younger one relishes the dal-rice served at school. Lakha Singh belongs to a small village near Meerut in Uttar Pradesh. His family does not own any land. So, they do odd jobs for the big farmers. Work is erratic and so is income. At times they get paid `200 for a hard day s work. But often it is in kind like a few kilograms of wheat or dal or even vegetables for toiling in the farm throughout the day. The family of six are barely able to  manage two square meals a day. Lakha lives in a kuchha hut on the outskirts of the village. The women of the family spend the day chopping fodder and collecting firewood in the fields. His father, a tuberculosis patient, passed away two years ago due to lack of medication. His mother now suffers from the same disease and life is slowly ebbing away. Although, the village has a primary school, Lakha never went there but he is happy to find his children going to school. New clothes happen once in a few years. Even soap and oil are a luxury for the family. Study the above cases of poverty and discuss the following issues related to poverty: Size of families Picture 3.2  Story  of Lakha Singh Poverty as a Challenge These two typical cases illustrate many dimensions of poverty. They show that poverty means hunger and lack of shelter. This also speaks about a situation in which parents are not able to give their children nutritious food three times a day or a situation where sick people cannot afford treatment. Poverty also means lack of clean water and sanitation facilities. It also means lack of a regular job with decent minimum wages. Above all, it means living with a sense of helplessness. Poor people are in a situation in which they are ill- treated at almost every place, in farms, factories, government offices, hospitals, railway stations, etc. Obviously, nobody would like to live in poverty. One of the biggest challenges of independent India has been to bring millions of its people out of abject poverty. Mahatama Gandhi said that India would be truly independent only when the poorest of its people become free of human Poverty as seen by social scientists Since poverty has many facets, social scientists look at it through a variety of indicators. Usually the indicators are used to relate with the levels of income and consumption. In recent times, a variety of other indicators have also been used to recognise whether a person is poor or not. For example, National Multidimensional Poverty Index is calculated on the basis of three broad indicators: health indicators like nutrition, child and adolescent mortality, maternal health. Education indicators like years of schooling and school attendance, and standard of living indicator like cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking water, housing, electricity, assets, bank account. Indicators such as social exclusion and vulnerability are also used to understand poverty (see box). According to this concept, poverty must be seen in terms of the poor having to live only in a poor surrounding with other poor people, excluded from enjoying social equality of better-off people in better surroundings. Social exclusion can be both a cause as well as a consequence of poverty in the usual sense. Broadly, it is a process through which individuals or groups are excluded from facilities, benefits and opportunities that others (the example is the working of the caste system in India in which people belonging to certain castes are excluded from equal opportunities. Social exclusion thus may lead to or can cause more damage than having a very low income. to poverty is a measure, which describes the communities (say, members of a backward caste) or individuals (such handicapped person) of becoming or remaining poor. Vulnerability is determined by the options available to different communities for finding an alternative living in terms of assets, education, health and job opportunities. Further, it is analysed on the basis of the greater risks these groups face at the time of natural disasters (earthquakes, tsunami). Additional analysis is made of their social and economic ability to handle these risks. In fact, vulnerability describes the greater probability of being more adversely affected than other people when bad time comes for everybody, whether a flood or an earthquake or simply a fall in the availability of jobs! At the centre of the discussion on poverty is the concept of the  poverty line. A common method used to measure poverty is based on the income or consumption levels. The term  consumption  means the amount spent on various items such as food, clothing, etc., by a family. A person is considered poor if his or her income or consumption level falls below a given  minimum level  necessary to fulfill the basic needs. What is necessary to satisfy basic needs is different at different times and in different countries. Therefore, poverty line may vary with time and place. Each country uses an imaginary line that is considered appropriate for its existing level of development and its accepted minimum social norms. For example, a person not having a car in the United States may be considered poor. In India, owning a car is still considered a luxury. While determining the poverty line in India, till a few years ago, a minimum level of food requirement, clothing, footwear, fuel and electricity, educational and medical needs, etc., were taken into consideration. The physical quantities  of these needs were multiplied by their prices in rupees. The formula for food requirement while estimating the poverty line was based on the desired calorie requirement. Food items, such as cereals, pulses, vegetables, milk, oil, sugar, etc., together provided these needed calories. The calorie needs vary depending on age, sex and the type of work that a person does. The accepted average calorie requirement in India was 2400 calories per person per day in rural areas and 2100 calories per person per day in urban areas. Since people living in rural areas engage themselves in more physical work, calorie requirements in rural areas were considered to be higher than in urban areas. The bare monetary expenditure per capita needed for buying these calorie requirements in terms of food grains, etc., and reported by families has been considered as poverty line. This amount was revised periodically, taking into consideration the rise in prices. Based on the global developments, the Government of India has begun to estimate the proportion of poor in India using 12 developmental indicators, which is popularly known as Multidimensional Poverty Index (see box). This national index complements the income or consumption expenditure based poverty measurement because it measures and compares deprivations directly. Discuss the following: What could be the difference between consumption based expenditure Multidimensional Poverty Index? What do you think would be the  minimum necessary level  in your Based on the methodology described in the previous section, the number and proportion of poor people in India, called Head Count Ratio (HCR),  is estimated. Table 3.1 shows that during the 1990s, expenditure based  poor declined from 45 to 37 per cent. However, the number of poor remained at about 40 crores. During 2000 2011, both the proportion and the number of poor declined. The proportion of multidimensional poor during 2015 2021 declined from 25 to 15 percent. As per the official record, multidimensional poverty during this period. Specifically deprivation  against various indicators have declined more sharply in rural areas than in urban Poverty as a Challenge Source:  India in figures, 2018, Government of India Central Statistics office, niti.gov.in/state-statistics (accessed on Nov. 15, 2021); National Multidimensional Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023, NITI Aayog, Government of India. Twelve Indicators of National Multidimensional Poverty Index NITI Aayog, a Government of India organisation evolved the National Multidimensional Poverty Index (NMPI) using the following 12 indicators. If an individual is found deprived on these indicators, he or she is considered as multidimensional poor. 1. Nutrition: A household is considered deprived if any child between the ages of 0 to 59 months, or woman between the ages of 15 to 49 years, or man between the ages of 15 to 54 years is found to be undernourished. 2. Child-Adolescent Mortality: A household is deprived if any child or adolescent under 18 years of age has died in the household in the five-year period preceding the survey. Maternal Health: A household is deprived if any woman in the household who has given birth in the 5 years preceding the survey has not received assistance from trained skilled medical personnel during the recent childbirth. 4. Years of Schooling: A household is deprived if not even one member of the household aged 10 years or older has completed six years of schooling. 5. School attendance: A household is deprived if any school-aged child is not attending school up to the age at which he/she would complete class. 6. Cooking Fuel: A household is deprived if a household cooks with dung, agricultural crops, shrubs, wood, charcoal, or coal. 7. Sanitation: A household is deprived if the household has unimproved or no sanitation facility or it is improved but shared with other households. 8. Drinking Water: A household is deprived if the household does not have access to improved drinking water or safe drinking water is at least a 30-minute walk  from home (as a round trip). 9. Housing: A household is deprived if the household has inadequate housing: the floor is made of natural materials, or the roof or wall are made of rudimentary materials. 10. Electricity: A household is deprived if the household has no electricity. 11. Assets: A household is deprived if the household does not own more than one of these assets: radio, TV, telephone, computer, animal cart, bicycle, motorbike, or refrigerator; and does not own a car or truck. 12. Bank Account: A household is deprived if no household member has a bank account or a post office account. Source:  https://www.undp.org/india/national-multidimensional-poverty-index-progress-review-2023 Table 3.1: Estimates of Poverty in India 1993   2019 Head Count Ratio (%) Number of poor (in millions) Multidimensional (Indicator) based Study Table 3.1 and answer the following Even if poverty ratio declined between 1993 94 and 2004 05, why did the number of poor remain at about 407 Are the dynamics of poverty reduction the same in rural and urban India? Study the Graph 3.1 and do the following: Identify the three states where the HCR is the highest. Identify the three states where HCR is the lowest. List the states which have HCR lower or higher than HCR for all India. Poverty in India also has another aspect or dimension. The proportion of poor people is not the same in every state (see graph 3.1). Although state level poverty has witnessed a significant decline from the levels of early seventies, the success rate of reducing poverty varies from state to state. It is pertinent to note that the states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana and Maharashtra had an HCR which was less than 10 per cent in 2019  21. In the meantime, remarkable strides have been made by States like Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. Studies also show states following different steps to reduce poverty. For example, Kerala has focused more on human resource development. In West Bengal, land reform measures have helped in reducing poverty. In Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu public distribution of food grains have been responsible for the The proportion of people below poverty line is also not same for all social groups and economic categories in India. Social groups, which are most vulnerable to poverty are Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe households. Similarly, among the economic groups, the most agricultural-labour households and the urban casual-labour households. Graph 3.2 shows the percentage of poor people Graph 3.1: Head Count Ratio in selected Indian States, 2019   21 Source:  https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-08/India-National-Multidimentional- Poverty as a Challenge in all these groups. Although the average of people below poverty line for all groups in India is 22; however, 43 out of 100 (see graph 3.2) people belonging to Scheduled Tribes are not able to meet their basic needs. Similarly, 34 per cent of casual workers in urban areas are below poverty line. About 34 per cent of casual farm labour (in rural areas) and 29 per cent of Scheduled Castes are also poor. The double disadvantage of being a landless casual wage labour household in the socially disadvantaged social groups of the scheduled caste or the scheduled seriousness of the problem. Some recent studies have shown that except for the scheduled tribe households, all the other three groups (i.e., Scheduled Castes, rural agricultural labourers and the urban casual labour households) have seen a decline in poverty in the 1990s. Apart from these social groups, there is also inequality of incomes within a family. In poor families all suffer, but some suffer more than others. In some cases, women, elderly people and female infants are denied equal access to resources available to the family. Graph 3.2: Poverty in India 2011 12: Most Vulnerable Groups Source:  www.worldbank.org/2016/India-s-Poverty-Profile (accessed on 29.09.2021) Global Poverty Scenario Is India the only country having poor people? For making comparisons between developing countries, many international organisations like the World Bank use a uniform standard for the poverty line: minimum availability of the equivalent of $2.15 per person per day. The proportion of people in different countries living in extreme economic poverty  defined by the World Bank as living on less than $2.15 per day  has fallen from 16.27 per cent in 2010 to 9.05 per cent in 2019. Why $ (dollar) has been used there? In India, we use rupee as a national currency, each country has its own currency. American dollar is used by international agencies to compare data across countries. Although there has been a substantial reduction in global poverty, it is marked with great regional differences. Poverty declined substantially in China and Southeast Asian countries as a result of rapid economic growth and massive development (Read table 3.2 and graph 3.3 and 3.4). The proportion of poor in China has become 0.1 per cent in 2020. The World Bank reports reveal that in the countries of South Asia (India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Afghanistan and Maldives) the decline has also been rapid from 13 per cent in 2017 to 11 per cent in 2021. With decline in the percentage of the poor, the number of poor has also declined significantly from 233 million in 2017 to 207 million in 2021. Table 3.2: Head Count Ratio Comparison among Some  Selected Countries % of Population below $2.15 a day (2017 ppp) 8. Sri Lanka Source: Poverty and Equity Database, World Bank Data; (databank.worldbank.org) Source: Poverty and Equity Database; World Bank (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=poverty-and-equity-database) Graph 3.3: Share of people living on a day, 2005 2019 La!n America and Carribean Sub Saharan Africa East Asia and Paci c Study Graphs 3.3 and 3.4 and do the Identify the areas of the world where poverty ratios have declined. Identify the area of the globe which has the largest concentration of the poor. Why do different countries use different poverty lines? In Sub-Saharan Africa, poverty in fact has declined from 36.6 per cent in 2017 to 35 per cent in 2019 (see graph 3.3). In Latin America and Caribbean, the ratio of poverty has increased from 4.4 per cent in 2017 to 4.6 per cent in 2021. Poverty has also resurfaced at 3 per cent in 2000 in some of the former socialist countries like Russia, where officially it was non-existent earlier. Poverty as a Challenge Source: World Bank PovcalNet and Poverty & Equity Data Portal (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=poverty-and-equity-database) Graph 3.4: Number of poor by region in millions By 2030, forecasts indicate that nearly 9 in10 of the extreme poor will live in Sub-Saharan Africa. Poverty and Sustainable The new Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations (UN) propose ending poverty of all types by 2030. It provides a shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, now  and into the future. At its centre point are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This requires urgent action from the part of both the developed and the developing countries (see box). Developed countries ought to support the developing countries in the endeavour of ending poverty, improve health and education, reduce inequalities, tackling climate change and promote sustainable The United Nations (UN) Organisation, an international organisation works with many countries to eradicate governments of member countries, UN came out with 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by 2030.  They are given in the form of infographics on the next page. Each goal was split into various targets to be achieved by the countries who are members of UN. One of the targets of SDG 1 is reducing the proportion of men, women and children in all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions at least to half by 2030. The decline in the proportion of poor reflects India s commitment to achieve the target related to Goal 1: No Poverty (End poverty in all its forms everywhere). Causes of Poverty There were number of causes for the widespread poverty in India. One historical reason is the low level of economic development under the British colonial administration. The policies of the colonial government ruined traditional handicrafts and discouraged development of industries like textiles. The low rate of growth persisted until the 1980s. This resulted in less job opportunities and low growth rate of incomes. This was accompanied by a high growth of population. With the spread of irrigation and the Green Revolution, many job opportunities were created in the agriculture sector. But the impact was limited to some parts of India. The industries, both in the public and the private sector, did provide some jobs. But these were not enough to absorb all the job seekers. Unable to find jobs with better income in cities, many people started working as rickshaw pullers, vendors, construction workers, domestic servants, etc. With irregular small incomes, these people could not afford reasonable shelter. They started living in slums on the outskirts of the cities and the problems Take the help of your teacher and gather the details of each SDG. Do a project report on how your country/ state is achieving these goals. of poverty, largely a rural phenomenon also became a feature of urban India. Another feature of high poverty rates has been the huge income inequalities. One of the major reasons for this is the unequal distribution of land and other resources. Despite many policies, we have not been able to tackle the issue of poverty. Major policy initiatives like land reforms which aimed at redistribution of assets in rural areas have not been implemented effectively by most of the implementation of policy could have improved the life of millions of rural poor. Many other socio-cultural and economic factors are also responsible for poverty. In order to fulfil social obligations and observe religious ceremonies, people in India, including the very poor, spend a lot of money and waste their hard earned income. Small farmers need money to buy agricultural inputs like seeds, fertilizer, pesticides, etc. Since poor people hardly have any savings, they borrow or accept loan at higher risk. Unable to repay because of indebtedness. So the high level of indebtedness is both the cause and effect Source: https://sdgs.un.org/goals Poverty as a Challenge Removal of poverty has been one of the major objectives of Indian developmental strategy. The current anti-poverty strategy of the government is based broadly on two factors   (i) promotion of economic growth (ii) targeted anti- Over a period of thirty years of independent India, lasting up to the early eighties, there were little per capita income growth and not much reduction in poverty. Official poverty estimates which were about 45 per cent in the early 1950s remained the same even in the early eighties. Since the eighties, India s economic growth has been one of the fastest in the world. The growth rate jumped from the average of about 3.5 per cent a year in the 1970s to about 6 per cent during the 1980s and 1990s. The two decades of 21st century (2000 2020) has also witnessed the rapid economic development. The higher growth rates have significantly helped in the reduction of poverty. Therefore, it is becoming clear that there is a strong link between economic growth and poverty reduction. Economic growth widens opportunities and provides the resources needed to invest in human development. This also encourages people to send their children, including the girl child, to schools in the hope of getting better economic returns by investing in education. The poor may not be able to take advantage from the opportunities created by economic growth. However, growth in the agriculture sector is much below expectations. This has a direct bearing on poverty. A large number of poor people live in villages and are dependent In these circumstances, there is a clear programmes. Although there are many schemes which are formulated to affect poverty directly or indirectly. Some of them are worth mentioning. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  Act, 2005 aims to provide 100 days of wage employment to every household to ensure livelihood security in rural areas. It also aimed at sustainable development to address the cause of drought, deforestration and soil erosion. One-third of the proposed jobs have been reserved for women under this act. The wage rate for unskilled manual workers is revised regularly, Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Abhiyan (PM Poshan) is a flagship programme of Government of India. It was initiated with twin purpose   (i) to improve the nutritional requirement especially calorie and the protein intake of the child, (ii) improve the school enrolment and eliminate the drop out from the school. It targets students from Classes I to VIII in Government, Government aided schools and special training centres under the Right to This scheme is implemented with the support of local governments and various community organisations. This programme encourages poor children, belonging to disadvantaged sections, to attend school more regularly and helps them concentrate on classroom activities. Observe some of the poor families around you and try to find the following: Which social and economic group do they belong to? Who are the earning members in the What is the condition of the old people in the family? Are all the children (both boys and girls) The Challenges Ahead Poverty has certainly declined in India. But despite the progress, poverty reduction remains India s most compelling challenge. Wide disparities in poverty are visible between rural and urban areas and among different States also. Certain social and economic groups are more vulnerable to poverty. Poverty reduction is expected to make better India. This would be possible mainly due to higher economic growth, increasing focus on universal education, declining population growth; empowerment of the women and the economically weaker sections of society would also facilitate the same. The income based definition of poverty captures only a limited part of what poverty really means to people. It is about a  minimum  subsistence level of living rather than a  reasonable  level of living. Many scholars advocate that we must broaden the concept into human poverty. A large number of people may have been able to feed themselves. But do they have education? Or shelter? Or health care? Or job security? Or self-confidence? Are they free from caste and gender discrimination? Is the practice of child experience shows that with development, the definition of what constitutes poverty also changes. In this chapter we have looked at the different approaches to Multidimensional Poverty Index put forward by NITI Aayog reveals that the multidimensionally poor has declined in India. This may be due to the array of Government interventions initiated in recent years. What do you think? Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan was launched in 2016 with the aim to reduce maternal and infant mortality by providing quality antenatal care to the pregnant women throughout the country. The scheme works towards  safe pregnancies, deliveries and addresses gaps in the service of the maternal care, to ensure constant and regular treatment to the beneficiaries. Services are provided on the ninth day of every month. This programme follows a systematic approach for engagement with private practitioners, motivating them to volunteer in the scheme at government health facilities. Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) aims towards women empowerment in rural areas. It encourages the use of smoke-free kitchen, thereby, saving them from chronic respiratory disorders and poor eye sights. It was launched in 2016 with an aim to provide clean cooking fuel (liquefied petroleum gas or LPG) to economically poor households especially in the rural areas, who cook using traditional methods by using either coal, wood or cow dungs. Its target beneficiaries are Below Poverty Line (BPL) households, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, forest dwellers and marginalised group households. To encourage the use of LPG, the scheme provides a completely free connection, including the first refill  and Over the years there is an increase in the LPG coverage throughout the country. Connections are issued in the name of the female member of the family. This scheme also promotes environment sustainability by reducing deforestation and carbon emission generated from burning coal and firewood. The use of clean cooking fuel, i.e., LPG means less time and effort in collecting firewood and encourages women to participate in social and economic Poverty as a Challenge In this chapter, we have looked at the different approaches of measuring poverty. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index, put forward by NITI Aayog in collaboration with UNDP and Oxford Policy and Human Development Initiative reveals that on the Headcount Ratio of multidimensionally poor, there has been a considerable reduction. Even when some of the states like Kerala and Tamil Nadu have reached less than 10 per cent on the HCR front, much is yet to be achieved by the other states. However, it is also to be noted that due to the array of Government intervention policies between 2005 06 and 2019 21 there has been significant decline in the number of MPI poor in the states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. How is the poverty line estimated in India? Do you think that the present methodology of poverty estimation is appropriate? Describe poverty trends in India since 1993. Discuss the major reasons for poverty in India. Identify the social and economic groups which are most vulnerable to poverty in India. Give an account of interstate disparities of poverty in India. Describe global poverty trends. Describe the role of government in reducing poverty in India? 9. What do you understand by human poverty? 10. Who are the poorest of the poor? 11. What are the main features of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005? 12. Differentiate between consumption based poverty line and NMP Index  based 13. List the indicators used to estimate multidimensional poor in India. DEATON, ANGUS AND VALERIE KOZEL  (Eds.) 2005. The Great Indian Poverty Debate.  MacMillan India Limited, New Delhi. Economic Survey 2015 2016. Ministry of Finance, Government of India, New Delhi. (Chapter on social sectors, [Online web] URL: http://indiabudget.nic.in/es_2004 05/social.htm) Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan 2002 2007. Planning Commission, New Delhi. Part II, Chapter 7: Poverty Elimination and Rural Employment, [Online web] URL: http:// www.planningcommission.nic.in/midterm/english-pdf/chapter-07.pdf NITI Aayog. 2023 National Multidimensional Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023 NITI Aayog/Government of India PANAGRIYA ARVIND AND VISHAL MORE  Poverty by social, religious and economic groups in India and its largest state, working paper no. 2013-14, Programme on Indian economic policies, Columbia Tenth Five Year Plan 2002 2007. Planning Commission, New Delhi. (Chapter 3.2, Poverty Alleviation in Rural India: Strategy and Programmes, [Online web] URL: http:// www.planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/10th/volume2/v2_ch3_2.pdf World Development Indicators 2016.  Featuring the Sustainable Development Goals, The World UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2023. 2023 Global Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI): Unstacking global poverty: Data for high impact action. New York. Food security means availability, accessibility and affordability of food to all people at all times. The poor households are more vulnerable to food insecurity whenever there is a problem of production or distribution of food crops. Food security depends on the Public Distribution System (PDS) and government vigilance and action at times, when this security is threatened. What is food security? Food is as essential for living as air is for breathing. But food security means something more than getting two square meals. Food security has following (a) availability of food means food production within the country, food imports and the previous years stock stored in government granaries. (b) accessibility means food is within reach of every person. (c) affordability implies that an individual has enough money to buy sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet one's Thus, food security is ensured in a country only if (1) enough food is available for all the persons (2) all persons have the capacity to buy food of acceptable quality and (3) there is no barrier on access to food. Why food security? The poorest section of the society might be food insecure most of the times while persons above the poverty line might also be food insecure when the country faces Food Security in India Food Security in India a national disaster/calamity like earthquake, drought, flood, tsunami, widespread failure of crops causing famine, etc. How is food security affected during a calamity? Due to a natural calamity, say drought, total production of foodgrains decreases. It creates a shortage of food in the affected areas. Due to shortage of food, the prices goes up. At the high prices, some people cannot afford to buy food. If such calamity happens in a very wide spread area or is stretched over a longer time period, it may cause a situation of starvation. A massive starvation might take a turn A Famine is characterised by wide spread deaths due to starvation and In the 1970s, food security was understood as the  availability at all times of adequate supply of basic foodstuffs  (UN, 1975). Amartya Sen added a new dimension to food security and emphasised the  access  to food through what he called  entitlements    a combination of what one can produce, exchange in the market alongwith state or other socially provided supplies. Accordingly, there has been a substantial shift in the understanding of food security. The 1995 World Food Summit declared,  Food security at the individual, household, regional, national and global levels exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life  (FAO, 1996, p.3). The declaration further recognises that  poverty eradication is essential to improve access to food. Food Security in India Picture 4.2 During the Bengal Famine of 1943, a family leaves its village in Chittagong district in Bengal. Picture 4.1 Starvation victims arriving at a relief centre, 1945. Some people say that the Bengal famine happened because there was a shortage of rice. Study the table and find out whether you agree with the statement? Which year shows a drastic decline in food availability? Do you know who were affected the most by the famine? The agricultural labourers, fishermen, transport workers and other casual labourers were affected the most by dramatically increasing price of rice. They were the ones who died in this famine. Table 4.1: Production of Rice in the Province of Bengal epidemics caused by forced use of contaminated water or decaying food and loss of body resistance due to weakening The most devastating famine that occurred in India was the FAMINE OF BENGAL in 1943. This famine killed thirty lakh people in the province of Bengal. Nothing like Bengal famine has happened in India again. It is, however, disturbing to note that even today, famine like conditions exist in many parts of the country, leading to starvation deaths at times. Natural calamities and pandemics may also lead to food shortage. For example Covid-19 pandemic had an adverse impact upon the food security. Restriction on movement of people and goods and services impacted economic activity. Therefore food security is needed in a country to ensure food at all times, including calamities and pandemics Who are food-insecure? Although a large section of people suffer from food and nutrition insecurity in India, the worst affected groups are landless people with little or no land to depend upon, traditional artisans, providers of traditional services, petty self- including beggars. In the urban areas, the food insecure families are those whose working members are generally employed in ill-paid occupations and casual labour market. These workers are largely (a) What do you see in Picture 4.1? (b) Which age group is seen in the first (c) Can you say that the family shown in the Picture 4.2 is a poor family? why? (d) Can you imagine the source of livelihood of the people, (shown in two Pictures) before the occurrence of famine? (In the context of a village) (e) Find out what type of help is given to the victims of a natural calamity at a (f ) Have you ever helped such victims (in the form of money, food, clothes, PROJECT WORK: Gather more information about famines in India. Story of Ramu Ramu works as a casual labourer in agriculture in Raipur village. His eldest son Somu who is 10 years old also works as a pali to look after the cattle of the Sarpanch of the village Satpal Singh. Somu is employed for the whole year by the Sarpanch and is paid a sum of Rs 1,000 for this work. Ramu has three more sons and two daughters but they are too young to work on the field. His wife Sunhari is also (part time) working as house cleaner for the livestock, removing and managing cow dung. She gets   litre milk and some cooked food along with vegetables for her daily work. Besides she also works in the field along with her husband in the busy season and Agriculture being a seasonal activity employs Ramu only during times of sowing, transplanting and harvesting. He remains unemployed for about 4 months during the period of plant consolidation and maturing in a year. He looks for work in other activities. Some times he gets employment in brick laying or in construction activities in the village. By all his efforts, Ramu is able to earn enough either in cash or kind for him to buy essentials for two square meals for his family. However, during the days when he is unable to get some work, he and his family really face difficulties and sometimes his small kids have to sleep without food. Milk and vegetables are not a regular part of meals in the family. Ramu is food insecure during 4 months when he remains unemployed because of the seasonal nature of agriculture work. engaged in seasonal activities and are paid very low wages that just ensure bare Food Security in India Does Ahmad have a regular income How does the yellow card help Ahmad Story of Ahmad Ahmad is a rickshaw puller in Bangalore. He has shifted from Jhumri Taliah along with his 3 brothers, 2 sisters and old parents. He stays in a jhuggi. The survival of all members of his family depends on his daily earnings from pulling. However, he does not have a secured employment and his earnings fluctuate every day. During some days he gets enough earning for him to save some amount after buying all his day-to-day necessities. On other days, he barely earns enough to buy his daily necessities. However, fortunately, Ahmad has a yellow card, which is PDS Card for below poverty line people. With this card, Ahmad gets sufficient quantity of wheat, rice, sugar and kerosene oil for his daily use. He gets these essentials at half of the market price. He purchases his monthly stock during a particular day when the ration shop is opened for below poverty people. In this way, Ahmad is able to eke out his survival with less than sufficient earnings for his big family where he is the only Why is agriculture a seasonal activity? Why is Ramu unemployed for about four months in a year? What does Ramu do when he is Who are supplementing income in Why does Ramu face difficulty when he is unable to have work? When is Ramu food insecure? run his family even with small earnings from rickshaw-pulling? The social composition along with the inability to buy food also plays a role in food insecurity. The SCs, STs and some sections of the OBCs (lower castes among them) who have either poor land-base or very low land productivity are prone to food insecurity. The people affected by natural disasters, who have to migrate to other areas in search of work, are also among the most food insecure people. A high incidence of malnutrition prevails among women. This is a matter of serious concern as it puts even the unborn baby at the risk of malnutrition. A large proportion of pregnant and nursing mothers and children under the age of 5 years constitute an important segment of the food insecure population. According to the National Health and Family Survey (NHFS) 1998 99, the number of such women and children is approximately 11 crore. The food insecure people are disproportionately large in some regions of the country, such as economically backward states with high incidence of poverty, tribal and remote areas, regions more prone to natural disasters etc. In fact, the states of Uttar Pradesh (eastern Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Chattisgarh, parts of Madhya Pradesh and Maharasthra account for largest number of food insecure people in the country. Hunger is another aspect indicating food insecurity. Hunger is not just an expression of poverty, it brings about poverty. The attainment of food security therefore involves eliminating current hunger and reducing the risks of future hunger. Hunger has chronic and seasonal dimensions. Chronic hunger is a consequence of diets persistently inadequate in terms of quantity and/or quality. Poor people suffer from chronic hunger because of their very low income and in turn inability to buy food even for survival. Seasonal hunger is related to cycles of food growing and harvesting. This is prevalent in rural areas because of the seasonal nature of agricultural activities and in urban areas because of casual labourers, e.g., there is less work for casual construction labourers during the rainy season. This type of hunger exists when a person is unable to get work for the entire year. The percentage of seasonal, as well as, chronic hunger has declined in India as shown in the above table. India is aiming at Self-sufficiency in Foodgrains since Independence. After Independence, Indian policy- makers adopted all measures to achieve self-sufficiency in food grains. India adopted a new strategy in agriculture, which resulted in  Green Revolution, especially in the production of wheat Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India, officially recorded the impressive strides of Green Revolution in agriculture by releasing a special stamp entitled  Wheat Revolution  in July 1968. The Table 4.2:  Percentage of Households with  Hunger  in India Type of hunger Source: Sagar (2004) success of wheat was later replicated in rice. The increase in foodgrains was, however, disproportionate. The highest rate of growth was achieved in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, which was 58 and 33 million tonnes in 2020 21. The total foodgrain production was 310 Million tonnes in 2020 21 and it has changed to 315 million tonnes in 2021 22. Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh recorded a significant production in field of wheat which was 36 and 18 million tonnes in 2020 21, respectively. West Bengal and UP, on the other hand, recorded significant production of rice 17 and 16 Million tonnes  in 2020 21 Visit some farms in a nearby village and collect the details of food crops cultivated by the farmers. Food Security in India Since the advent of the Green Revolution in the early-1970s, the country has avoided famine even during adverse India has become self-sufficient in foodgrains during the last 30 years because of a variety of crops grown all over the country. The availability of foodgrains (even in adverse weather conditions or otherwise) at the country Picture 4.3  A farmer from Punjab standing in a field of one of the High Yielding Varieties of wheat on which the Green Revolution is based Food Security in India 259 257 265 252 252 276 277 281 297 310 315 Graph 4.1: Production of Foodgrains in India (Million Tonnes) announced price for their crops. This price is called Minimum Support Price (MSP). The MSP is declared by the government every year before the sowing season to provide incentives to farmers for raising the production of these crops. The purchased foodgrains are stored in granaries. Do you know why this buffer stock is created by the government? This is done to distribute foodgrains in the deficit areas and among the poorer strata of the society at a price lower than the market price also known as Issue Price. This also helps resolve the problem of shortage of food during adverse weather conditions or during the periods of calamity. What is the Public Distribution The food procured by the FCI is distributed through government regulated ration shops among the poorer section of the society. This is called the Public Distribution System (PDS). Ration shops are now present in most localities, Study Graph 4.1 and answer the following (a) In which year did our country cross the 200 Million tonne per year mark in foodgrain production? (b) In which decade did India experience the highest decadal increase in (c) Is production increase consistent in India since 2000 01? level has further been ensured with a carefully designed food security system by the government. This system has two components: (a) buffer stock, and (b) public What is Buffer stock? Buffer Stock is the stock of foodgrains, namely wheat and rice, procured by the Corporation of India (FCI). The FCI purchases wheat and rice from the farmers in states where there is surplus production. The farmers are paid a pre- Source:  AS & E Division, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in Economic Survey 2023 24, Statistical Appendix. * Third Estimate Production (in million tonnes) villages, towns and cities. There are about 5.5 lakh ration shops all over the country. Ration shops also, known as Fair Price Shops, keep stock of foodgrains, sugar, and kerosene for cooking. These items are sold to people at a price lower than the market price. Any family with a ration card* can buy a stipulated amount of these items (e.g. 35 kg of grains, 5 litres of kerosene, 5 kgs of sugar etc.) every month from the nearby Are there any problems that they face? Why are ration shops necessary? The introduction of Rationing in India dates back to the 1940s against the backdrop of the Bengal famine. The rationing system was revived in the wake of an acute food shortage during the 1960s, prior to the Green Revolution. In the wake of the high incidence of poverty levels, as reported by the NSSO in the introduced: Public Distribution System (PDS) for food grains (in existence earlier but strengthened thereafter); Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) (introduced in 1975 on an experimental basis) and Food-for -Work** (FFW) (introduced in 1977 78). Over the years, several new programmes have been restructured with the growing experience of administering the programmes. At present, there are several Poverty Alleviation Programmes (PAPs), mostly in rural areas, which have an explicit food component also. While some of the programmes such as PDS, mid-day meals etc. are exclusively food security programmes, most of the PAPs also enhance food security. Employment programmes greatly contribute to food security by increasing the income of Gather detailed information about some of the programmes initiated by the government, which have food component. programme, Employment Guarantee Scheme, Sampurna Grameen Rojgar Yojana, Mid Day Meal, Integrated Child Development Services, etc. Discuss with your teacher. *There are three kinds of ration cards: (a) Antyodaya cards for the poorest of the poor; (b) BPL cards for those below poverty line; and (c) APL cards for all others. Visit your area s ration shop and get the 1. When does the ration shop open? 2. What are the items sold at the ration 3. Compare the prices of rice and sugar from the ration shop with the prices at any other grocery shop? (for families below poverty line) 4. Find out: Do you have a ration card? What has your family recently bought with this card from the ration shop? Food Security in India **The National Food Security This Act provides for food and nutritional security life at affordable prices and enables people to live a life with dignity. Under this act, 75% of the rural population and 50% of the categorised as eligible households for (Rs per kg.) Up to 1992 20 kg of Poor and non-poor 35 kg of BPL   W-4.15 Poorest of the poor 35 kg of per household foodgrains per month 10 kg of 5 Kg per person Table 4.3: Some Important Features of PDS Note: W - Wheat; R - Rice; BPL - Below poverty line; APL - Above poverty line Source: Food Corporation of India, fci.gov.in/sales.php-view-41,2021 (updated on 29.09.2021) National Food Security Act, 2013 the coverage of PDS was universal with no discrimination between the poor and the non-poor. Over the years, the policy related to PDS has been revised to make it more efficient and targeted. In 1992, Revamped Public Distribution System (RPDS) was introducted in 1,700 blocks in the country. The target was to provide the benefits of PDS to remote and backward areas. From June 1997, in a renewed attempt, Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) was introducted to adopt the principle of targeting the  poor in all areas. It was for the first time that a differential price policy was adopted for poor and non- poor. Further, in 2000, two special schemes were launched viz., Antyodaya Anna Yojana*** (AAY) and  Annapurna Scheme (APS) with special target groups Current Status of Public the Public Distribution System (PDS) is the most important step taken by the Government of India (GoI) towards ensuring food security. In the beginning, of  poorest of the poor  and  indigent senior citizens, respectively. The functioning of these two schemes was linked with the existing network of the PDS. Some important features of PDS are summarised in Table 4.3. The PDS has proved to be the most effective instrument of government policy over the years in stabilising prices and making food available to consumers at instrumental in averting widespread hunger and famine by supplying food from surplus regions of the country to the deficit ones. In addition, the prices have been under revision in favour of poor households in general. The system, including the minimum support price and procurement has contributed to an increase in foodgrain production and provided income security to farmers in However, FCI godowns are overflowing with grains, with some rotting away and some being eaten by rats. Graph 4.2 shows the Source: Food Corporation of India (dfpd.gov.in/foodgrain-stocking), 2020 21 (Accessed on 29/09/2021) Graph 4.2: Central Foodgrains (Wheat + Rice) Stock and Minimum Buffer Norm (Million Tonnes) difference in foodgrain stocks in Central pool and its stocking norms. ***Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) AAY was launched in December 2000. Under this scheme one crore of the poorest among the BPL families covered under the targeted public distribution system were identified. Poor families were identified by the respective state rural development departments through a Below Poverty Line (BPL) survey. Twenty-five kilograms of foodgrains were made available to each eligible family at a highly subsidised rate of ` 2 per kg for wheat and ` 3 per kg for rice. This quantity has been enhanced from 25 to 35 kg with effect from April 2002. The scheme has been further expanded twice by additional 50 lakh BPL families in June 2003 and in August 2004. With this increase, 2 crore families have been covered under the AAY. Food Security in India Study the Graph 4.2 and answer the In which recent year foodgrain stock with the government was maximum? What is the minimum buffer stock norm for the FCI? overflowing with foodgrains? In 2022, the stock of wheat and rice with Central pool is 159 LMT ( Lakh million tonnes) of wheat and 104 LMT of rice which was much more than the minimum buffer norms. However, these remained consistently higher than the buffer norms. The situation improved with the distribution of foodgrains under different schemes launched by the government. There is a general consensus that high level of buffer stocks of foodgrains is very undesirable and can be wasteful. The storage of responsible for high carrying costs, in addition to wastage and deterioration in grain quality. Freezing of MSP for a few years should be considered seriously. procurement at enhanced MSP# is the result of the pressure exerted by leading foodgrain producing states, such as Punjab, Haryana and Andhra Pradesh. Moreover, as the procurement is concentrated in a few prosperous regions (Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and to a lesser extent in West Bengal) and mainly of two crops  wheat and rice  increase in MSP has induced farmers, particularly in surplus states, to divert land from production of coarse grains, which is the staple food of the poor, to the production of rice and wheat. The intensive utilisation of water in the cultivation of rice has also led to environmental degradation and fall in the water level, threatening the sustainability of the agricultural development in these states. Farmers Carrying Bags of Grains to the  Granaries. +Subsidy is a payment that a government makes to a producer to supplement the market price of a commodity. Subsidies can keep consumer prices low while maintaining a higher income for domestic producers. # The rising Minimum Support Prices (MSP) have raised the maintenance cost of procuring foodgrains by the government. Rising transportation and storage costs of the FCI are other contributing factors in this increase. As per the NSSO report No. 558 in rural India, the per person per month consumption of rice has declined from 6.38 Kg. in 2004-05 to 5.98 Kg in 2011-12. In urban India, the per person per month consumption of rice, too has declined from 4.71 Kg in 2004-05 to 4.49 Kg in 2011-12. Per Capita consumption of PDS rice has doubled in rural India and increased by 66% in urban India since 2004-05. The per Capita consumption of PDS wheat has doubled since 2004-05 in both rural and PDS dealers are sometimes found resorting to malpractices like diverting the grains to open market to get better margin, selling poor quality grains at ration shops, irregular opening of the shops, etc. It is common to find that ration shops regularly have unsold stocks of poor quality grains left. This has proved to be a big problem. When ration shops are unable to sell, a massive stock of foodgrains piles up with the FCI. In recent years, there is another factor that has led to the decline of the PDS. Earlier every family, poor and non-poor had a ration card with a fixed quota of items such as rice, wheat, sugar etc. These were sold at the same low price to every family. The three types of cards and the range of prices that you see today did not exist. A large number of families could buy foodgrains from the ration shops subject to a fixed quota. These included low income families whose incomes were marginally higher than the below poverty line families. Now, with TPDS of three different prices, any family above the poverty line gets very little discount at the ration shop. The price for APL family is almost as high as open market price, so there is little incentive for them to buy these items from the ration shop. Role of cooperatives in food security The cooperatives are also playing an important role in food security in India especially in the southern and western parts of the country. The cooperative societies set up shops to sell low priced goods to poor people. For example, out of all fair price shops running in Tamil Nadu, around 94 per cent are being run by the cooperatives. In Delhi, Mother Dairy is making strides in provision of milk and vegetables to the consumers Government of Delhi. Amul is another success story of cooperatives in milk and milk products from Gujarat. It has brought about the White Revolution in the country. These are a few examples of many more cooperatives running in different parts of the country ensuring food security of different sections Similarly, in Maharashtra, Academy of facilitated a network of NGOs for setting up grain banks in different regions. ADS organises training and capacity building programmes on food security for NGOs. Grain Banks are now slowly taking shape in different parts of Maharashtra. ADS efforts to set up Grain Banks, to facilitate replication through other NGOs and to influence the Government s policy on food security are thus paying rich dividends. The ADS Grain Bank programme is acknowledged as a successful and innovative food security intervention. Food Security in India 1. How is food security ensured in India? 2. Which are the people more prone to food insecurity? 3. Which states are more food insecure in India? 4. Do you believe that green revolution has made India self-sufficient in food 5. A section of people in India are still without food. Explain? 6. What happens to the supply of food when there is a disaster or a calamity? 7. Differentiate between seasonal hunger and chronic hunger? 8. What has our government done to provide food security to the poor? Discuss any two schemes launched by the government? 9. Why buffer stock is created by the government? 10. Write notes on: Minimum support price Fair price shops 11. What are the problems of the functioning of ration shops? 12. Write a note on the role of cooperatives in providing food and related items. Food security of a nation is ensured if all of its citizens have enough nutritious food available, all persons have the capacity to buy food of acceptable quality and there is no barrier on access to food. The people living below the poverty line might be food insecure all the time while better off people might also turn food insecure due to calamity or disaster. Although a large section of people suffer from food and nutrition insecurity in India, the worst affected groups are landless or land poor households in rural areas and people employed in ill paid occupations and casual labourers engaged in seasonal activities in the urban areas. The food insecure people are disproportionately large in some regions of the country, such as economically backward states with high incidence of poverty, tribal and remote areas, regions more prone to natural disasters etc. To ensure availability of food to all sections of the society the Indian government carefully designed food security system, which is composed of two components: (a) buffer stock and (b) public distribution system. In addition to PDS, various poverty alleviation programmes were also started which comprised a component of food security. Some of these programmes are: Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS); Food-for -Work (FFW); Mid-Day Meals; Antyodaya ojana (AAY) etc. In addition to the role of the government in ensuring food security, there are various cooperatives and NGOs also working intensively towards DEV, S. MAHENDRA, KANNAN, K.P. AND RAMCHANDRAN, NEERA (EdS.). 2003. Towards a Food Secure India: Issues and Policies. Institute for Human Development, New Delhi. SAGAR, VIDYA.  2004. 'Food Security in India', Paper presented in ADRF-IFRI Final Meeting on Food Security in India, September 10 11, New Delhi. SAXENA, N.C. 2004. 'Synergising Government Efforts for Food Security' in Swaminathan, M.S. and Medrano, Pedro (Eds.), Towards Hunger Free India, East-West Books, SAXENA, N.C. 2004. 'Reorganising Policies and Delivery for Alleviating Hunger and Malnutrition' Paper presented at National Food Security Summit, New Delhi. SEN, A.K. 1983. 'Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation'. Oxford University Press. SHARMA, REKHA AND MEENAKSHI, J.V. 2004. 'Micronutrient Deficiencies in Rural Diets'. Towards Hunger Free India: From Vision to Action. Proceedings of Consultation on 'Towards Hunger -free India: Count Down from 2007'. New Delhi. FAO 1996. World Food Summit 1995. Food and Agricultural Organisation, Rome. Government of India. Economic Survey. 2002 03, 2003 04, 2004 05. Ministry of Finance. New Delhi. IIPS 2000. National Health and Family Survey   2. International Institute of Population UN 1975. Report of the World Food Conference 1975. (Rome), United Nations, New Food Corporation of India; (fci.gov.in/stocks.php?view=18)