

=== Class10_Polity ===

Po we r -sha r ing With this chapter, we resume the tour of democracy that we started last year. We noted last year that in a democracy all power does not rest with any one organ of the government. An intelligent sharing of power among legislature, executive and judiciary is very important to the design of a democracy. In this and the next two chapters, we carry this idea of power-sharing forward. We start with two stories from Belgium and Sri Lanka. Both these stories are about how democracies handle demands for power-sharing. The stories yield some general conclusions about the need for power-sharing in democracy.  This allows us to discuss various forms of power-sharing that will be taken up in the following two chapters. De moc ra tic  Polit ics Belgium and Sri Lanka I have a simple equation in mind. Sharing power = dividing power = country. Why do we start by talking of Ethnic:  A social division based on shared culture. People belonging to the same ethnic group believe in their common descent because of similarities of physical type or of culture or both. They need not always have the same religion or Belgium is a small country in Europe, smaller in area than the state of Haryana. It has borders with France, the Netherlands, Germany and Luxembourg. It has a population of a little over one crore, about half the population of Haryana. The ethnic composition of this small country is very complex. Of the country s total population, 59 per cent lives in the Flemish region and speaks Dutch language. Another 40 per cent people live in the Wallonia region and speak French. Remaining one per cent of the Belgians speak German. In the capital city Brussels, 80 per cent people speak French while 20 per cent are Dutch-speaking. The minority French-speaking community was relatively rich and powerful. This was resented by the Dutch-speaking community who got the benefit of economic development and education much later. This led to tensions between the Dutch- speaking and French-speaking communities during the 1950s and 1960s. The tension between the two communities was more acute in Brussels. Brussels presented a special problem: the Dutch-speaking people constituted a majority in the country, but a minority in the Let us compare this to the situation in another country. Sri Lanka is an island nation, just a few kilometres off the southern coast of Tamil Nadu. It has about two crore people, about the same as in Haryana. Like other nations in the South Asia region, Sri Lanka has a diverse population. The major social groups are the Sinhala-speakers (74 per cent) and the Tamil-speakers (18 per cent). Among Tamils there are two sub-groups. Tamil natives of the country are called  Sri Lankan Look at the maps of Belgium and Sri Lanka. In which region, do you find concentration of different For more details, visit https://www.belgium.be/en Po we r -sha r ing of Sri Lanka Sri Lankan Tamil For more details, visit https://www.gov.lk Tamils  (13 per  cent). The rest, whose forefathers came from India as plantation workers during colonial period, are called  Indian Tamils. As you can see from the map,  Sri Lankan Tamils are concentrated in the north and east of the country. Most of the Sinhala-speaking people are Buddhists, while most of the Tamils are Hindus or Muslims. There are about 7 per cent Christians, who are both Tamil and Sinhala. Just imagine what could happen in situations like this. In Belgium, the Dutch community could take advantage of its numeric majority and force its will on the French and German-speaking population. This would push the conflict among communities further. This could lead to a very messy partition of the country; both the sides would claim control over Brussels. In Sri Lanka, the Sinhala community enjoyed an even bigger majority and could impose its will on the entire country. Now, let us look at what happened in both these countries. Majoritarianism in Sri Lanka Sri Lanka emerged as an independent country in 1948. The leaders of the Sinhala community sought to secure dominance over government by virtue of their majority. As a result, the democratically elected government adopted a series of majoritarian measures to establish In 1956, an Act was passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official language, thus disregarding Tamil. The governments followed preferential policies that favoured Sinhala applicants for university positions and government jobs. A new constitution stipulated that the state shall protect and foster All these government measures, coming one after the other, gradually increased the feeling of alienation among the Sri Lankan Tamils. They felt that none of the major political parties led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders was sensitive to their language and culture. They felt that the constitution and government policies denied them equal political rights, discriminated against them in getting jobs and other opportunities and ignored their interests. As a belief that the majority community should be able to rule a country in whichever way it wants, by disregarding the wishes and needs of the De moc ra tic  Polit ics What kind of a solution is this? I am glad our Constitution does not say which minister will come from The Belgian leaders took a different path. They recognised the existence of regional differences and cultural diversities. Between 1970 and 1993, they amended their constitution four times so as to work out an arrangement that would enable everyone to live together within the same country. The arrangement they worked out is different from any other country and is very innovative. Here are some of the elements of the Belgian model:  	  Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch and French-speaking ministers shall be equal in the central government. Some special laws require if the majority If Sinhalas don t rule in Sri Lanka, where else will the support of majority of members from each linguistic group. Thus, no single community can make decisions  	 Many powers of the Central Government have been given to State Governments of the two regions of the country. The State Governments are not subordinate to the Central in which both the communities have equal representation. The French- speaking people accepted equal representation in Brussels because the Dutch-speaking community has accepted equal representation in the Accommodation in Belgium Civil war: A violent within a country that becomes so intense that it appears like a result, the relations between the Sinhala and Tamil communities strained over time. The Sri Lankan Tamils launched of Tamil as an official language, for regional autonomy and equality of opportunity in securing education and jobs. But their demand for more several political organisations were formed demanding an independent Tamil Eelam (state) in northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka. The distrust between the two communities turned into widespread conflict. It soon turned into a civil war. As a result thousands of people of both the communities have been killed. Many families were forced to leave the country as refugees and many more lost their livelihoods. The civil war has caused a terrible setback to the social, cultural and economic life of the country. It ended in 2009. The photograph here is of a street address in Belgium. You will notice that place names and directions in two languages   French and Dutch. Po we r -sha r ing So you are sharing of power makes us more odd! Let me What do we learn from these two stories of Belgium and Sri Lanka? Both are democracies. Yet, they dealt with the question of power sharing differently. In Belgium, the leaders have realised that the unity of the country is possible only by respecting the feelings and interests of different communities and regions. Such a realisation resulted in mutually acceptable arrangements for sharing power. Sri Lanka shows us a contrasting example. It shows us that if a majority community wants to force its dominance over others and refuses to share power, it can undermine the unity of the country. Read any newspaper for one week and make clippings of news related to ongoing conflicts or wars. A group of five students could pool their clippings together and do the following:  	 Classify these conflicts by their location (your state, India,  	 Find out the cause of each of these conflicts. How many of these are related to power sharing disputes?  	 Which of these conflicts could be resolved by working out power European Parliament in Brussels, Belgium accepted equal representation in the Apart from the Central and the State Government, there is a third kind of government. This  community government  is elected by people belonging to one language community   Dutch, French and German-speaking   no matter where they live. This government has the power regarding cultural, educational and language-related issues. You might find the Belgian model very complicated. It indeed is very complicated, even for people living in Belgium. But these arrangements have worked well so far. They helped to avoid civic strife between the two major communities and a possible division of the country on linguistic lines. When many countries of Europe came together to form the European Union, Brussels was chosen as its headquarters. De moc ra tic  Polit ics Annette studies in a Dutch medium school in the northern region of Belgium. Many French-speaking students in her school want the medium of instruction to be French. Selvi studies in a school in the northern region of Sri Lanka. All the students in her school are Tamil-speaking and they want the medium of instruction to be Tamil. If the parents of Annette and Selvi were to approach respective governments to realise the desire of the child who is more likely to succeed? And why? Why power sharing is desirable? Thus, two different sets of reasons can be given in favour of power sharing. Firstly, power sharing is good because it helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups. Since social conflict often leads to violence and political instability, power sharing is a good way to ensure the stability of political order. Imposing the will of majority community over others may look like an attractive option in the short run, but in the long run it undermines the unity of the nation. Tyranny of the majority is not just oppressive for the minority; it often affects majority adversely as well. There is a second, deeper reason why power sharing is good for democracies. Power sharing is the very spirit of democracy. A democratic rule involves sharing power with those affected by its exercise, and who have to live with its effects. People have a right to be consulted on how they are to be governed. A legitimate government is one where citizens, through participation, acquire a stake in Let us call the first set of reasons prudential and the second moral. While prudential reasons stress that power sharing will bring out better outcomes, moral reasons emphasise the very act of power sharing as valuable. Prudential: Based on prudence, or on careful calculation of gains and losses. Prudential decisions are usually contrasted with decisions based purely on moral The cartoon at the left refers to the problems of running the Germany s grand coalition government that includes the two major parties of the country, namely the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party. The two parties are historically rivals to each other. They had to form a coalition government because neither of them got clear majority of seats on their own in the 2005 elections. They take divergent positions on several policy matters, but still jointly run the government. For details about the German Parliament, visit https://www.bundestag.de/en   Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Po we r -sha r ing As usual, Vikram was driving the motorbike under a vow of silence and Vetal was the pillion rider.  As usual, Vetal started telling Vikram a story to keep him awake while driving. This time the story went as follows:  In the city of Beirut, there lived a man called Khalil. His parents came from different communities.  His father was an Orthodox Christian and mother a Sunni Muslim. This was not so uncommon in this modern, cosmopolitan city. People from various communities that lived in Lebanon came to live in its capital, Beirut. They lived together, intermingled, yet fought a bitter civil war among themselves. One of Khalil s uncles was killed in that war. At the end of this civil war, Lebanon s leaders came together and agreed to some basic rules for power sharing among different communities. As per these rules, the country s President must belong to the Maronite sect of Catholic Christians. The Prime Minister must be from the Sunni Muslim community. The post of Deputy Prime Minister is fixed for Orthodox Christian sect and that of the Speaker for Shi a Muslims. Under this pact, the Christians agreed not to seek French protection and the Muslims agreed not to seek unification with the neighbouring state of Syria.When the Christians and Muslims came to this agreement, they were nearly equal in population. Both sides have continued to respect this agreement though now the Muslims are in clear majority. Khalil does not like this system one bit. He is a popular man with political ambition. But under the present system, the top position is out of his reach. He does not practise either his father s or his mother s religion and does not wish to be known by either. He cannot understand why Lebanon can t be like any other  normal  democracy.  Just hold an election, allow everyone to contest and whoever wins maximum votes becomes the president, no matter which community he comes from. Why can t we do that, like in other democracies of the world?  he asks. His elders, who have seen the bloodshed of the civil war, tell him that the present system is the best guarantee for peace  The story was not finished, but they had reached the TV tower where they stopped every day. Vetal wrapped up quickly and posed his customary question to Vikram:  If you had the power to rewrite the rules in Lebanon, what would you do? Would you adopt the  regular  rules followed everywhere, as Khalil suggests? Or stick to the old rules? Or do something else?  Vetal did not forget to remind Vikram of their basic pact:  If you have an answer in mind and yet do not speak up, your mobike will freeze, and so will you!  Can you help poor Vikram in answering Vetal? De moc ra tic  Polit ics power should be distributed among as many citizens as possible. In modern democracies, power sharing arrangements can take many forms. Let us look at some of the most common arrangements that we have or will come across. 1	 Power is shared among different organs of government, such as the legislature, executive and judiciary. Let us call this horizontal distribution of power because it allows different organs of government placed at the same level to exercise different powers. Such a separation ensures that none of the organs can exercise unlimited power. Each organ checks the others. This results in a balance of power among various institutions. Last year, we studied that in a democracy, even though ministers and government officials exercise power, they are responsible to the Parliament or State Assemblies. Similarly, although judges are appointed by the executive, they can check the functioning of executive or laws made by the legislatures. This arrangement is called a system of checks and balances. 2	 Power can be shared among governments at different levels   a general government for the entire country and governments at the provincial or regional level. Such a general government for the entire country is usually called federal government. In India, we refer to it as the Central or Union Government. The governments at the provincial or regional level are called by different names in different countries. The idea of power-sharing has emerged in opposition to the notions of undivided political power. For a long time, it was believed that all power of a government must reside in one person or group of persons located at one place. It was felt that if the power to decide is dispersed, it would not be possible to take quick decisions and to enforce them. But these notions have changed with the emergence of democracy. One basic principle of democracy is that people are the source of all political power. In a democracy, people rule themselves through institutions of self-government. In a good democratic government, due respect is given to diverse groups and views that exist in a society. Everyone has a voice in the shaping of public policies. Therefore, it follows that in a democracy, political Forms of power-sharing Reigning the Reins In 2005, some new laws were made in Russia giving more powers to its president. During the same time, the US president visited Russia. What, according to this cartoon, is the relationship between democracy and concentration of power? Can you think of some other examples to illustrate the point being made here?   Olle Johansson - Sweden, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 25 Feb. 2005 Po we r -sha r ing In India, we call them State Governments. This system is not followed in all countries. There are many countries where there are no provincial or state governments. But in those countries like ours, where there are different levels of government, the constitution clearly lays down the powers of different levels of government. This is what they did in Belgium, but was refused in Sri Lanka. This is called federal division of power. The same principle can be extended to levels of government lower than the State government, such as the municipality and panchayat. Let us call division of powers involving higher and lower levels of government vertical division of power. We shall study these at some length in the next chapter. 3	 Power may also be shared among different social groups, such as the religious and linguistic groups.  Community government  in Belgium is a good example of this arrangement. In some countries, there are constitutional and legal arrangements, whereby socially weaker sections and women are represented in the legislatures and administration. Last year, we studied the system of  reserved constituencies  in assemblies and the parliament of our country. This type of arrangement is meant to give space in the government and administration to diverse social In my school, the class monitor month. Is that what you call a groups, who otherwise, would feel alienated from the government. This method is used to give minority communities a fair share in power. In Unit II, we shall look at various ways of accommodating social diversities. 4	 Power sharing arrangements can also be seen in the way political parties, pressure groups and movements control or influence those in power. In a democracy, the citizens must have freedom to choose among various contenders for power. In contemporary democracies, this takes the form of competition among different parties. Such competition ensures that power does not remain in one hand. In the long run, power is shared among different political parties that represent different ideologies and social groups. Sometimes this kind of sharing can be direct, when two or more parties form an alliance to contest elections. If their alliance is elected, they form a coalition government and thus share power. In a democracy, we find interest groups, such as those of traders, businessmen, industrialists, farmers and industrial workers. They also will have a share in governmental power, either through participation in governmental committees or bringing influence on the decision-making process. In Unit III, we shall study the working of De moc ra tic  Polit ics Here are some examples of power sharing. Which of the four types of power sharing do these represent? Who is sharing power with whom? The Bombay High Court ordered the Maharashtra State Government to immediately take action and improve living conditions for the 2,000-odd children at seven children s homes in Mumbai. The government of Ontario state in Canada has agreed to a land claim settlement with the aboriginal community. The Minister responsible for Native Affairs announced that the government will work with aboriginal people in a spirit of mutual respect Russia s two influential political parties, the Union of Right Forces and the Liberal Yabloko Movement, agreed to unite their organisations into a strong right- wing coalition. They propose to have a common list of candidates in the next  	 The finance ministers of various states in Nigeria got together and demanded that the federal government declare its sources of income. They also wanted to know the formula by which the revenue is distributed to various State Governments. 1.	 What are the different forms of power sharing in modern democracies? Give an example of each of these. 2.	 State one prudential reason and one moral reason for power sharing with an example from the Indian context. 3.	 After reading this chapter, three students drew different conclusions. Which of these do you agree with and why? Give your reasons in about 50 words. Thomman -  Power sharing is necessary only in societies which have religious, linguistic or ethnic divisions. Mathayi   Power sharing is suitable only for big countries that have regional divisions. Ouseph   Every society needs some form of power sharing even if it is small or does not have social divisions. 4.	 The Mayor of Merchtem, a town near Brussels in Belgium, has defended a ban on speaking French in the town s schools.  He said that the ban would help all non-Dutch speakers integrate in this Flemish town. Do you think that this measure is in keeping with the spirit of Belgium s power sharing arrangements? Give your reasons in about 50 words. Po we r -sha r ing 7.	 Consider the following statements about power sharing arrangements in Belgium and Sri Lanka. A. 	In Belgium, the Dutch-speaking majority people tried to impose their domination on the minority French-speaking community. B.	 In Sri Lanka, the policies of the government sought to ensure the dominance of the Sinhala-speaking majority. C.	 The Tamils in Sri Lanka demanded a federal arrangement of power sharing to protect their culture, language and  equality of opportunity in education and jobs. D.	 The transformation of Belgium from unitary government to a federal one prevented a possible division of the country on Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B, C and D   (b) A, B and D   (c) C and D   (d) B, C and D 5.	 Read the following passage and pick out any one of the prudential reasons for power sharing offered in this.  We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the dream of Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true democracy. It restores power to the only place where power belongs in a democracy   in the hands of the people. Giving power to Panchayats is also a way to reduce corruption and increase administrative efficiency. When people participate in the planning and  implementation of developmental schemes, they would naturally exercise greater control over these schemes. This would eliminate the corrupt middlemen. Thus, Panchayati Raj will strengthen the foundations of our democracy.  6.	 Different arguments are usually put forth in favour of and against power sharing. Identify those which are in favour of power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below? Power sharing: A.	 reduces conflict among different communities B.	 decreases the possibility of arbitrariness C.	 delays decision making process D.	 accommodates diversities E.	 increases instability and divisiveness F.	 promotes people s participation in government G.	 undermines the unity of a country De moc ra tic  Polit ics 9.	 Consider the following two statements on power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below: A. 	Power sharing is good for democracy. B.	 It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups. Which of these statements are true and false? A is true but B is false Both A and B are true Both A and B are false A is false but B is true Power shared among different organs of government A. Community government Power shared among governments at different levels B. Separation of powers Power shared by different social C. Coalition government Power shared by two or more D. Federal government 8.	 Match List I (forms of power sharing) with List II (forms of government) and select the correct answer using the codes given below in the lists: Fe d era lism In the previous chapter, we noted that vertical division of power among different levels of government is one of the major forms of power-sharing in modern democracies. In this chapter, we focus on this form of power- sharing. It is most commonly referred to as federalism. We begin by describing federalism in general terms. The rest of the chapter tries to understand the theory and practice of federalism in India. A discussion of the federal constitutional provisions is followed by an analysis of the policies and politics that has strengthened federalism in practice. Towards the end of the chapter, we turn to the local government, a new and third tier of Indian federalism. De moc ra tic  Polit ics What is federalism? I am confused. What do we call the Indian government? Is it Union, Federal or Though only 25 of the world s 193 countries have federal political systems, their citizens make up 40 per cent of the world s population. Most of the large countries of the world are federations. Can you notice an exception to this rule in Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002, McGill-Queen s University Press, 2002. Let us get back to the contrast between Belgium and Sri Lanka that we saw in the last chapter. You would recall that one of the key changes made in the Constitution of Belgium was to reduce the power of the Central Government and to give these powers to the governments existed in Belgium even earlier. They had their roles and powers. But all these powers were given to these governments and could be withdrawn by the Central Government. The change that took place in 1993 was that the regional governments were given constitutional powers that were no longer dependent on the central government. Thus, Belgium shifted from a unitary to a federal form of government. Sri Lanka continues to be, for all practical purposes, a unitary system where the national government has all the powers. Tamil leaders want Sri Lanka to become a federal system. Federalism is a system of government in which the power is divided between a central authority and various constituent units of the country. Usually, a federation has two levels of government. One is the government for the entire country that is usually responsible for a few subjects of common national interest. The  others are governments at the level of provinces or states that look after much of the day- to-day administering of their state. Both these levels of governments enjoy their power independent of Fe d era lism 7 	 The federal system thus has dual objectives: to safeguard and promote unity of the country, while at the same time accommodate regional diversity. Therefore, two aspects are crucial for the institutions and practice of federalism. Governments at different levels should agree to some rules of power-sharing. They should also trust that each would abide by its part of the agreement. An ideal federal system has both aspects: mutual trust and agreement to live together. The exact balance of power between the central and the state federation to another.  This balance depends mainly on the historical context in which the federation was formed. There are two kinds of routes through which federations have been formed. The first route involves independent States coming together on their own to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling sovereignty and retaining identity, they can increase their security. This type of  coming together  federations include the USA, Switzerland and Australia. In this first category of federations, all the constituent States usually have equal power and are strong vis- -vis the federal government. The second route is where a large country decides to divide its power between the constituent States and the national government. India, Spain and Belgium are examples of this kind of  holding together  federations. In this second category, the Central Government tends to be more powerful vis- - vis the States. Very often different constituent units of the federation have unequal powers. Some units are granted special powers. works only in why did Belgium area over which someone has legal authority. The area may be defined in terms of geographical boundaries or in terms of certain kinds of In this sense, federations are Under the unitary system, either there is only one level of government or the sub-units are subordinate to the central government. The central government can pass on orders to the provincial or the local government. But in a federal system, the central government cannot order the state government to do something. State government has powers of its own for which it is not answerable to the central government. Both these governments are separately answerable to the people. Let us look at some of the key features of federalism: 1 	 There are two or more levels (or tiers) of government. 2 	 Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own jurisdiction in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration. levels or tiers of government are specified in the constitution. So the existence and authority of each tier of government is constitutionally 4 	 The fundamental provisions of the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the consent of both the levels of 5 	 Courts have the power to the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise government in the exercise of their 6 	 Sources of revenue for each level of government are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy. De moc ra tic  Polit ics did they wish to avoid talking Some Nepalese citizens were discussing the proposals on the adoption of federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of Khag Raj: I don t like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats for different caste groups as in India. Sarita:  Ours in not a very big country. We don t need federalism. Babu Lal: I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they get their own state government. Ram Ganesh: I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlier enjoyed by the king will now be exercised by our elected representatives. If you were participating in this conversation, what would be your response to each of these? Which of these reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is? What makes India a federal country? We have earlier seen how small countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka face so many problems of managing diversity. What about a vast country like India, with so many languages, religions and regions? What are the power sharing arrangements in Let us begin with the Constitution. India had emerged as an independent nation after a painful and bloody partition. Soon after Independence, several princely states became a part of the country. The Constitution declared India as a Union of States. Although it did not use the word federation, the Indian Union is based on the principles of federalism. Let us go back to the seven features of federalism mentioned above. We can see that all these features apply to the provisions of the Indian Constitution. The Constitution originally provided for a two-tier system of government, the Union Government or what we call the Central Government, representing the Union of India and the State governments. Later, a third tier of federalism was added in the form of Panchayats and Municipalities. As in any federation, these different tiers enjoy separate jurisdiction.  The Constitution clearly provided a three-fold distribution of legislative powers between the Union Government and the State Governments. Thus, it contains three lists:  	 Union List includes subjects of national importance, such as defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking, communications and currency. They are included in this list because we need a uniform policy on these matters throughout the country. The Union Government alone can make laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the Union List.  	 State List contains subjects of State and local importance, such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and irrigation. The State Governments alone can make laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the State List.  	 Concurrent List includes subjects of common interest to both the Union Government as well as the State Governments, such What makes India a federal country? Fe d era lism as education, forest, trade unions, marriage, adoption and succession. Both the Union as well as the State Governments can make laws on the subjects mentioned in this list. If their laws conflict with each other, the law made by the Union Government will prevail. What about subjects that do not fall in any of the three lists? Or subjects like computer software that came up after the constitution was made? According to our constitution, the Union Government has the power to legislate on these  residuary  subjects. We noted above that most federations that are formed by  holding together  do not give equal power to its constituent units. Thus, all States in the Indian Union do not have identical powers. Some States enjoy a special status. States such as Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram enjoy special powers under certain provisions of the Constitution of India (Article 371) due to their peculiar social and historical circumstances. These special powers are especially enjoyed in relation to the protection of land rights of indigenous peoples, their culture and also preferential employment in government services. Indians who are not permanent residents of this State cannot buy land or house here. Similar special provisions exist for some other States of India as well. Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All India Radio daily for one week. Make a list of news items related to government policies or decisions by classifying these into the following categories:  	 News items that relate only to the Central Government,  	 News items that relate only to your or any other State Government,  	 News items about the relationship between the Central and State Governments. There are some units of the Indian Union which enjoy very little power. These are areas which are too small to become an independent State but which could not be merged with any of the existing States. These areas, like Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the capital city of Delhi, are called Union Territories. These territories do not have the powers of a State. The Central Government has special powers in running these areas. This sharing of power between the Union Government and the State Governments is basic to the structure of the Constitution. It is not easy to make changes to this power sharing arrangement. The Parliament cannot on its own change this arrangement. Any change to it has to be first passed by both the Houses of Parliament with at least two-thirds majority. Then it has to be ratified by the legislatures of at least half of the The judiciary plays an important role in overseeing the implementation of constitutional provisions and procedures. In case of any dispute about the division of powers, the High Courts and the Supreme Court make a decision. The Union and State Governments have the power to raise resources by levying taxes in order to carry on the government and the responsibilities assigned to each of them. If agriculture and why do we have commerce in the De moc ra tic  Polit ics Pokharan, the place where India conducted its nuclear tests, lies in Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to the Central Government s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of India from conducting the nuclear tests?   Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools. But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the new textbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission from the Union Government before these textbooks can be launched?   Suppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have different policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can the Prime Minister of India intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers will have to obey? Fe d era lism Constitutional provisions are necessary for the success of federalism but these are not sufficient. If the federal experiment has succeeded in India, it is not merely because of the clearly laid out constitutional provisions. The real success of federalism in India can be attributed to the nature of democratic politics in our country. This ensured that the spirit of federalism, respect for diversity and desire for living together became shared ideals in our country. Let us look at some of the major ways in which this happened. The creation of linguistic States was the first and a major test for democratic politics in our country. If you look at the political map of India when it began its journey as a democracy in 1947 and that of 2019, you will be surprised by the extent of the changes. Many old States have vanished and many new States have been created. Areas, boundaries and names of the States have been In 1947, the boundaries of several old States of India were changed in order to create new States. This was done to ensure that people who spoke the same language lived in the same State. Some States were created not on the basis of language but to recognise differences based on culture, ethnicity or geography. These include States like Nagaland, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.   Has your village remained under the same State since Independence? If not, what was the name of the earlier   Can you identify names of three States in 1947 that have been   Identify any three States which have been carved out of  bigger How is federalism practised? De moc ra tic  Polit ics When the demand for the formation of States on the basis of language was raised, some national leaders feared that it would lead to the disintegration of the country. The Central Government resisted linguistic States for some time. But the experience has shown that the formation of linguistic States has actually made the country more united. It has also made A second test for Indian federation is the language policy. Our Constitution did not give the status of national language to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official language. But Hindi is the mother tongue of only about 40 per cent of Indians. Therefore, there were many safeguards to protect other languages. Besides Hindi, there are 22 other languages recognised as Scheduled Languages by the Constitution. A candidate in an examination conducted for the Central Government positions may opt to take the examination in any of these languages. States too have their own official languages. Much of the government work takes place in the official language of the Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of our country adopted a very cautious attitude in spreading the use of Hindi. According to the Constitution, the use of English for official purposes was to stop in 1965. However, many non-Hindi speaking States demanded that the use of English  continue. In Tamil Nadu, this movement took a violent form. The Central Government responded by agreeing to continue the use of English along with Hindi for official purposes. Many critics think that this solution favoured the English-speaking elite. Promotion of Hindi continues to be the official policy of the Government of India. Promotion does not mean that the Central Government can impose Hindi on States where people speak a different language. The flexibility shown by Indian political leaders helped our country avoid the kind of situation that Sri Lanka finds itself in. Restructuring the Centre-State relations is one more way in which federalism has been strengthened in practice. How the constitutional arrangements for sharing power work in reality depends to a large extent on how the ruling parties and leaders follow these arrangements. For a long time, the same party ruled both at the Centre and in most of the States. This meant that the State Governments did not exercise their rights as autonomous federal units. As and when the ruling party at the State level was different, the parties that ruled at the Centre tried to undermine the power of the States.  In those days, the Central Government would often misuse the Constitution to dismiss the State Governments that were controlled by rival parties. This undermined the spirit of federalism. All this changed significantly after 1990. This period saw the rise of regional political parties in many States of the country. This was also the beginning of the era of coalition governments at the Centre. Since no single party got a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the major national parties had to enter into an alliance with many parties including several regional parties to form a government at the Centre. A government formed by the coming together of at least two political partners in a coalition form a political alliance and adopt a common Fe d era lism Here are two cartoons showing the relationship between Centre and States. Should the State go to the Centre with a begging bowl? How can the leader of a coalition keep the partners of government satisfied? good for our The States Plead for More Powers   Kutty - Laughing with Kutty   Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons Perils of Running a Coalition Government This led to a new culture of power sharing and respect for the autonomy of State Governments. This trend was supported by a major judgement of the Supreme Court that made it difficult for the Central Government to dismiss state governments in an arbitrary manner. Thus, federal power sharing is more effective today than it was in the early years after the Constitution came into force. De moc ra tic  Polit ics Linguistic diversity of India How many languages do we have in India? The answer depends on how one counts it. The latest information that we have is from the Census of India held in 2011. This census recorded more than 1300 distinct languages which people mentioned as their mother tongues. These languages were grouped together under some major languages. For example, languages like Bhojpuri, Magadhi, Rajasthani and many others were grouped together under  Hindi. Even after this grouping, the Census found 121 major languages. Of these, 22 languages are now included in the Eighth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and are therefore called  Scheduled Languages. Others are called  non-Scheduled Languages. In terms of languages, India is perhaps the most diverse country in the world. A look at the enclosed table makes it clear that no one language is the mother tongue of the majority of our population. The largest language, Hindi, is the mother tongue of only about 44 per cent Indians. If we add to that all those who knew Hindi as their second or third language, the total number was still less than 50 per cent in 2011. As for English, only 0.02 per cent Indians recorded it as their mother tongue. Another 11 per cent knew it as a second or Read this table carefully, but you need not memorise it. Just do  	 Make a bar or pie chart on the basis of this information.  	 Prepare a map of linguistic diversity of India by shading the region where each of these languages is spoken on the map  	 Find out about any three languages that are spoken in India but are not included in Scheduled Languages of India N   Stands for negligible. Source: http://www.censusindia.gov.in Fe d era lism Read the following excerpts from an article by noted historian, Ramachandra Guha, that appeared in the Times of India on November 1, Take the example of your own state or any other state that was affected by linguistic reorganisation. Write a short note for or against the argument given by the author here on the basis of that example. De moc ra tic  Polit ics We noted above that federal governments have two or more tiers of governments. We have so far discussed the two-tiers of government in our country. But a vast country like India cannot be run only through these two-tiers. States in India are as large as independent countries of Europe. In terms of population, Uttar Pradesh is bigger than Russia, Maharashtra is about as big as Germany. Many of these States are internally very diverse. There is thus a need for power sharing within these States. Federal power sharing in India needs another tier of  government, below that of the State governments. This is the rationale for decentralisation of power. Thus, resulted a third- tier of government, called local When power is taken away from Central and State governments and given to local government, it is called decentralisation. The basic idea behind decentralisation is that there are a large number of problems and issues which are best settled at the local level. People have better knowledge of problems in their localities. They also have better ideas on where to spend money and how to manage things more efficiently. Besides, at the local level it is possible for the people to directly participate in decision making. This helps to inculcate a habit of democratic participation. Local government is the best way to realise  one  important principle of democracy, namely local The need for decentralisation was recognised in our Constitution. Since then, there have been several attempts to decentralise So, we are like a in a train! I always prefer the power to the level of villages and towns. Panchayats in villages and municipalities in urban areas were set up in all the States. But these were directly under the control of state governments. Elections to these local governments were not held regularly. Local governments did not have any powers or resources of their own. Thus, there was very little decentralisation in effective terms. A major step towards decentra- lisation was taken in 1992. The Constitution was amended to make the third-tier of democracy more powerful and effective.  	 Now it is constitutionally mandatory to hold regular elections to local government bodies.  	 Seats are reserved in the elected bodies and the executive heads of these institutions for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other  	 At least one-third of all positions are reserved for women.  	 An independent institution called the State Election Commission has been created in each State to conduct panchayat and municipal  	 The State governments are required to share some powers and revenue with local government bodies. The nature of sharing varies from State to State. Rural local government is popularly known by the name panchayati raj. Each village, or a group of villages in some States, has a gram panchayat. This is a council consisting of several ward members, often called panch, and a president or sarpanch. They are directly Decentralisation in India Fe d era lism elected by all the adult population living in that ward or village. It is the decision-making body for the entire village. The panchayat works under the overall supervision of the gram sabha. All the voters in the village are its members. It has to meet at least twice or thrice in a year to approve the annual budget of the gram panchayat and to review the performance of the gram panchayat. The local government structure goes right up to the district level. A few gram panchayats are grouped together to form what is usually called a panchayat samiti or block or mandal. The members of this representative body are elected by all the panchyat members in that area. All the panchayat samitis or mandals in a district together constitute the zilla (district) parishad. Most members of the zilla parishad are elected. Members of the Lok Sabha and MLAs of that district and some other officials of other district level bodies are also its members. Zilla parishad chairperson is the political head of the zilla parishad. Similarly, local government bodies exist for urban areas as well. Municipalities are set up in towns. Big cities are constituted into municipal corporations. Both municipalities and municipal corporations are controlled by elected bodies consisting of people s representatives. Municipal chairperson is the political head of the municipality. In a municipal corporation, such an officer is called runs the country. runs the state. Logically, then, the chairperson of Zilla run the district. Why does the D.M. or Collector What do these newspaper clippings have to say about efforts of decentralisation in India? De moc ra tic  Polit ics This new system of local government is the largest experiment in democracy conducted anywhere in the world. There are now about 36 lakh elected representatives in the panchayats and municipalities etc., all over the country. This number is bigger than the population of many countries in the world. Constitutional status for local government has helped to deepen democracy in our country. It has also increased women s representation and voice in our democracy. At the same time, there are many difficulties. While elections are held regularly and enthusiastically, gram sabhas are not held regularly. Most state governments have not transferred significant powers to the local governments. Nor have they given adequate resources. We are thus still a long way from realising the ideal of self-government. Find out about the local government in the village or town you live in. If you live in a village, find out the names of the following: your panch or ward member, your sarpanch, your panchayat samiti, the chairperson of your zilla parishad. Also find out when did the last meeting of the gram sabha take place and how many people took part in that. If you live in urban areas, find out the name of your municipal councillor, and the municipal chairperson or mayor. Also find out about the budget of your municipal corporation, municipality and the major items on which money was spent. An experiment in Brazil A city called Porto Alegre in Brazil has carried out an extraordinary  experiment in combining decentralisation with participative democracy. The city has set up a parallel organisation operating alongside the municipal council, enabling local inhabitants to take real decisions for their city. The nearly 13 lakh people in this city get to participate in making the budget for their own city. The city is divided into many sectors or what we call wards. Each sector has a meeting, like that of the gram sabha, in which anyone living in that area can participate. There are some meetings to discuss issues that affect the entire city. Any citizen of the city can participate in those meetings. The budget of the city is discussed in these meetings. The proposals are put to the municipality that takes a final decision About 20,000 people participate in this decision making exercise every year. This method has ensured that the money cannot be spent only for the benefit of the colonies where rich people live. Buses now run to the poor colonies and builders cannot evict slum-dwellers without resettling them. In our own country, a similar experiment has taken place in some areas in Kerala. Ordinary people have participated in making a plan for the development of their locality. Fe d era lism 1. 	 Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India: Manipur, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa. 2. 	 Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on a blank outline political map of the world. 3. 	 Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in India that is similar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium. 4. 	 What is the main difference between a federal form of government and a unitary one? Explain with an example. 5. 	 State any two differences between the local government before and after the Constitutional amendment in 1992. 6. 	 Fill in the blanks: Since the United States is a   ___________________ type of federation, all the constituent States have equal powers and States are ______________vis- -vis the federal government. But India is a _____________________ type of federation and some States have more power than others. In India, the ____________ government has more powers. 7. 	 Here are three reactions to the language policy followed in India. Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions. Sangeeta: The policy of accommodation has strengthened Arman: Language-based States have divided us by making everyone conscious of their language. Harish: This policy has only helped to consolidate the dominance of English over all other languages. 8. 	 The distinguishing feature of a federal government is: (a)	National government gives some powers to the provincial (b)	Power is distributed among the legislature, executive and (c)	Elected officials exercise supreme power in the government. (d)	Governmental power is divided between different levels of 9.	 A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are given here. Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists as provided in the table below. A.	 Defence; B. Police; C. Agriculture; D. Education; E.	 Banking; F. Forests; G. Communications; H. Trade; I. Marriages De moc ra tic  Polit ics 10.	Examine the following pairs that give the level of government in India and the powers of the government at that level to make laws on the subjects mentioned against each. Which of the following pairs is not 11.	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: 1. Union of India A. Prime Minister 3. Municipal Corporation 4. Gram Panchayat 12.	Consider the following two statements. A.	 In a federation, the powers of the federal and provincial governments are clearly demarcated. B.	 India is a federation because the powers of the Union and State Governments are specified in the Constitution and they have exclusive jurisdiction on their respective subjects. C. 	Sri Lanka is a federation because the country is divided into D. 	India is no longer a federation because some powers of the States have been devolved to the local government bodies. Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B and C   (b) A, C and D   (c) A and B only   (d) B and C only (a) State government (b) Central government (c) Central and State governments (d) Local governments Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e The existence of social diversity does not threaten democracy. Political expression of social differences is possible and sometimes quite desirable in a democratic system. In this chapter we apply these ideas to the practice of democracy in India. We look at three kinds of social differences that can take the form of social divisions and inequalities. These are social differences based on gender, religion and caste. In each case we look at the nature of this division in India and how it gets expressed in politics. We also ask whether different expressions based on these differences are healthy or otherwise in a democracy. De moc ra tic  Polit ics Gender and politics Let us begin with gender division. This is a form of hierarchical social division seen everywhere, but is rarely recognised in the study of politics. The gender division tends to be understood as natural and unchangeable. However, it is not based on biology but on social expectations and stereotypes. Boys and girls are brought up to believe that the main responsibility of women is housework and bringing up children. This is reflected in a sexual division of labour in most families: women do all work inside the home such as cooking, cleaning, washing clothes, tailoring, looking after children, etc., and men do all the work outside the home. It is not that men cannot do housework; they simply think that it is for women to attend to these things. When these jobs are paid for, men are ready to take up these works. Most tailors or cooks in hotels are men. Similarly, it is not that women do not work outside their home. In villages, women fetch water, collect fuel and work in the fields. In urban areas, poor women work as domestic helper in middle class homes, while middle class women work in offices. In fact, the majority of women do some sort of paid work in addition to domestic labour. But their work is not valued and does not get The result of this division of labour is that although women constitute half of the humanity, their role in public life, especially politics, is minimal in most societies. Earlier, only men were allowed to participate in public affairs, vote and contest for public offices. Gradually the gender issue was raised in politics. Women in different parts of the world organised and agitated for equal rights. There were agitations in different countries for the extension of voting rights to women. A poster from Bengal affirming women s Sexual division of labour: A system in which all work inside the home is either done by the women of the family, or organised by them through the domestic Why not? If politics is about dominance in the Why are we work in this Is this politics? Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e These agitations demanded enhancing the political and legal status of women and improving their educational and career opportunities. More radical women s movements aimed at equality in personal and family life as well. These movements are called feminist movements. Political expression of gender division and political mobilisation Discuss all these perceptions of an ideal woman that prevail in our society. Do you agree with any of these? If not, what is your image of an ideal woman? woman or a man who believes in equal rights and women and men. on this question helped to improve women s role in public life. We now find women working as scientists, doctors, engineers, lawyers, managers and college and university teachers which were earlier not considered suitable for women. In some parts of the world, for example in Scandinavian countries, such as Sweden, Norway and Finland, the De moc ra tic  Polit ics rule by father, this concept is used to refer to a system that values men more and gives them power Income generating work Household and related work No work/ Leisure Sleep, self-care, reading etc. Daily time use (hours: minutes) Source: Government of India, Time Use Survey, 1998-99. A  time use survey  was conducted in six states of our country. It shows that an average woman works every day for a little over seven and half hours while an average man works for six and a half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible. participation of women in public life is very high. In our country, women still lag much behind men despite some improvement since Independence. Ours is still a male-dominated, patriarchal society. Women face disadvantage, discrimination and oppression in various ways:  	 The literacy rate among women is only 54 per cent compared with 76 per cent among men. Similarly, a smaller proportion of girl students go for higher studies. When we You can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household. Observe all the adult male and female members of your family for one week. Every day note down the number of hours each of them spends on the following activities: income generating activity (working at the office or shop or factory or field, etc.), household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching water, looking after children or elders, etc.), reading and recreation, talking/gossiping, self-care, taking rest or sleeping. If necessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each activity for a week and calculate the daily average for each activity for each member. Do women work more in your family as well? Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e says to outsiders:  I don t work. I am a housewife.  But I see her all the time. If what she does is not work, what else is work? look at school results, girls perform as well as boys, if not better in some places. But they drop out because parents prefer to spend their resources for their boys  education rather than spending equally on their sons and daughters.  	 No wonder the proportion of women among the highly paid and valued jobs, is still very small. On an average, an Indian woman works one hour more than an average man every day. Yet much of her work is not paid and therefore, often  	 The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 provides that equal wages should be paid to equal work. However in almost all areas of work, from sports and cinema, to factories and fields, women are paid less than men, even when both do exactly the same work.   	 In many parts of India, parents prefer to have sons and find ways to have the girl child aborted before she is born. Such sex-selective abortion led to a decline in child sex ratio (number of girl children per thousand boys) in the country to merely 919. As the map shows, this Can you identify your State on this map? What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it others with a Identify the States which have child sex ratio below Compare this map with the poster on the next page. How do the two of them tell us about the same issue? Source: Census Report of 2011 De moc ra tic  Polit ics   Oxfam GB ratio has fallen below 850 or even 800 in some States. There are reports of various kinds of harassment, exploitation and violence against women. Urban areas have become particularly unsafe for women. They are not safe even within their own home from beating, harassment and other forms of domestic violence. All this is well known. Yet issues related to women s well being or otherwise are not given adequate attention. This has led many feminists and women s movements to the conclusion that unless women control power, their problems will not get adequate attention.  One way to ensure this is to have more women as elected representatives. In India, the proportion of women in legislature has been very low. For example, the percentage of elected women members in Lok Sabha has touched 14.36 per cent of its total strength for the first time in 2019. Their share in the state assemblies is less than 5 per cent. In this respect, India is among the Could you think of some reasons why women s representation is so low in India? Do you think Americas and Europe have achieved a satisfactory level of Women in  national parliaments in different regions of the world (in%) Note: Figures are for the per cent of women in the directly elected houses of parliament as on 1 October Source: http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e If casteism and are bad, what a good thing? Why don t we oppose all those who divide the society on any lines   caste, bottom group of nations in the world (see the graph below). India is behind the averages for several developing countries of Africa and Latin America. In the government, cabinets are largely all-male even when a woman becomes the Chief Minister or the Prime Minister. One way to solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local government bodies in panchayats and municipalities are now reserved for women. Now there are more than 10 lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban Women s organizations and activists had been demanding a similar reservation of at least one- third of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies for women. A bill with this proposal was pending before the Parliament for many decades. In 2023, Nari shakti Vandan Adhiniyam (Womens  Reservation Act, 2023) has been passed which will give 33 percent reservation of seats for women in Lok Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies and also Delhi Gender division is an example that some form of social division needs to be expressed in politics. This also shows that disadvantaged groups do benefit when social divisions become a political issue. Do you think that women could have made the gains we noted above if their unequal treatment was not raised in the political domain? De moc ra tic  Polit ics Religion, communalism and politics Let us now turn to a very different kind of social division, the division based on religious differences. This division is not as universal as gender, but religious diversity is fairly widespread in the world today. Many countries including India have in their population, followers of different religions. As we noticed in the case of Northern Ireland, even when most of the people belong to the same religion, there can be serious differences about the way people practice that religion. Unlike gender differences, the religious differences are often expressed in the field of politics. Consider the following:  	 Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be separated from politics. What he meant by religion was not any particular religion like Hinduism or Islam but moral values that inform all religions. He believed that politics must be guided by ethics drawn  	 Human rights groups in our country have demanded that the Government should take special steps to prevent communal riots and protect religious minorities.  	 Women s movement has argued that family laws of all religions discriminate against women. So they have demanded that government should change these laws to make them more equitable. All these instances involve a relationship between religion I am not Why should I and politics. But they do not seem very wrong or dangerous. Ideas, ideals and values drawn from different religions can and perhaps should play a role in politics. People should be able to express in politics their needs, interests and demands as a member of a religious community. Those who hold political power should sometimes be able to regulate the practice of religion so as to prevent discrimination and oppression. These political acts are not wrong as long as they treat every religion The problem begins when religion is seen as the basis of the nation. The example of Northern Ireland in Chapter 3 shows the dangers of such an approach to nationalism. The problem becomes more acute when religion is expressed in politics in exclusive and partisan terms, when one religion and its followers are pitted against another. This happens when beliefs of one religion are presented as superior to those of other religions, when the demands of one religious group are formed in opposition to another and when state power is used to establish domination of one religious group over the rest. This manner of using religion in politics is communal politics. Communal politics is based on the idea that religion is the principal basis of social community. Communalism involves thinking Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e along the following lines. The followers of a particular religion must belong to one community. Their fundamental interests are the same. Any difference that they may have is irrelevant or trivial for community life. It also follows that people who follow different religions cannot belong to the same social community. If the followers of different religions have some commonalities these are superficial and immaterial, their interests are bound to be different and involve a conflict. In its extreme form, communalism leads to the belief that people belonging to different religions cannot live as equal citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has to dominate the rest or they have to form different nations. This belief is fundamentally flawed.  People of one religion do not have the same interests and aspirations in every context. Everyone has several other roles, positions and identities. There are many voices inside every community. All these voices have a right to be heard. Therefore any attempt to bring all followers of one religion together in context other than religion is bound to suppress many voices within that community. Communalism can take various forms in politics:  	 The most common expression of communalism is in everyday beliefs. These routinely involve religious prejudices, stereotypes of religious communities and belief in the superiority of one s religion over other religions. This is so common Family laws: Those laws that deal with family related matters such as marriage, In our country, different family laws apply to followers of that we often fail to notice it, even when we believe in it.  	 A communal mind often leads to a quest for political dominance of one s own religious community. For those belonging to majority community, this takes the form of majoritarian dominance. For those belonging to the minority community, it can take the form of a desire to form a separate political unit.  	 Political mobilisation on religious lines is another frequent form of communalism. This involves the use of sacred symbols, religious leaders, emotional appeal and plain fear in order to bring the followers of one religion together in the political arena. In electoral politics, this often involves special appeal to the interests or emotions of voters of one religion in preference to others.  	 Sometimes communalism takes its most ugly form of communal violence, riots and massacre. India and Pakistan suffered some of the worst communal riots at the time of the Partition. The post-Independence period has also seen large scale Communalism was and continues to be one of the major challenges to democracy in our country. The makers of our Constitution were aware of this challenge. That is why, they chose the model of a secular state. This choice was reflected in several constitutional provisions that we studied last year:  	 There is no official religion for the Indian state. Unlike the status of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, that of Islam I often crack people from one that make me De moc ra tic  Polit ics in Pakistan and that of Christianity in England, our Constitution does not give a special status to any religion.  	 The Constitution provides to all individuals and communities freedom to profess, practice and propagate any religion, or not to  The Constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of    At the same time, the Constitution allows the state to intervene in the matters of religion in order to ensure equality within religious communities. For example, it bans Understood in this sense, secularism is not just an ideology of some parties or persons. This idea constitutes one of the foundations of our country. Communalism should not be seen as a threat to some people in India. It threatens the very idea of India. That is why communalism needs to be combated. A secular Constitution like ours is necessary but not sufficient to combat communalism. Communal prejudices and propaganda need to be countered in everyday life and religion- based mobilisation needs to be countered in the arena of politics. Caste and politics We have seen two instances of the expression of social divisions in the arena of politics, one largely positive and the other largely negative. Let us turn to our final case, that of caste and politics, that has both positive and the negative aspects. Unlike gender and religion, caste division is special to India. All societies have some kind of social inequality and some form of division of labour. In most societies, occupations are passed on from one generation to another. Caste system is an extreme form of this. What makes it different from other societies is that in this system, hereditary occupational division was sanctioned by rituals. Members of the same caste group were supposed to form a social community that practiced the same or similar occupation, married within the caste group and did not eat with members from other Caste system was based on exclusion of and discrimination against the  outcaste  groups. They were subjected to the inhuman practice of untouchability about which you have studied in Class IX. That is why political leaders and social reformers like Jotiba Phule, Gandhiji, B.R. Ambedkar and Periyar Ramaswami Naicker advocated and worked to establish a society in which caste inequalities Partly due to their efforts and partly due to other socio-economic changes, castes and caste system in modern India have undergone great changes. With economic d e v e l o p m e n t,  l a r g e  s c a l e urbanisation, growth of literacy and education, occupational mobility and the weakening of the position of landlords in the villages, the old notions of caste hierarchy are breaking down. Now, most of the Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e Social and Religious Diversity of India The Census of India records the religion of each and every Indian after every ten years. The person who fills the Census form visits every household and records the religion of each member of that household exactly the way each person describes it. If someone says she has  no religion  or that he is an  atheist, this is exactly how it is recorded. Thus we have reliable information on the proportion of different religious communities in the country and how it has changed over the years. The pie chart below presents the population proportion of six major religious communities in the country. Since Independence, the total population of each community has increased substantially but their proportion in the country s population has not changed much. In percentage terms, the population of the Hindus, Jains and Christians has declined marginally since 1961. The proportion of Muslim, Sikh and Buddhist population has increased slightly. There is a common but mistaken impression that the proportion of the Muslims in the country s population is going to overtake other religious communities. Expert estimates done for the Prime Minister s High Level Committee (popularly known as Sachar Committee) show that the proportion of the Muslims is expected to go up a little, by about 3 to 4 per cent, in the next 50 years. It proves that in overall terms, the population balance of different religious communities is not likely to change in a big way. The same is true of the major caste groups. The Census of India counts two social groups: the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Both these broad groups include hundreds of castes or tribes whose names are listed in an official Schedule. Hence the prefix  Scheduled  in their name. The Scheduled Castes, commonly known as Dalits, include those that were previously regarded as  outcaste  in the Hindu social order and were subjected to exclusion and untouchability. The Scheduled Tribes, often referred to as Adivasis, include those communities that led a secluded life usually in hills and forests and did not interact much with the rest of society. In 2011, the Scheduled Castes were 16.6 per cent and the Scheduled Tribes were 8.6 per cent of the country s population. The Census does not yet count the Other Backward Classes, the group we discussed in Class IX. Hence there are some differences about their proportion in the country s population. The National Sample Survey of 2004 05 estimates their population to be around 41 per cent. Thus the SC, ST and the OBC together account for about two-thirds of the country s population and about three-fourths of the Hindu population. Population of different religious communities in India, 2011 Others include Buddhist 0.7% Jain 0.4% Other Religions and Persuasions 0.7% Religion not stated 0.2% Source: Census of India, 2011 De moc ra tic  Polit ics times, in urban areas it does not matter much who is walking along next to us on a street or eating at the next table in a restaurant. The Constitution of India prohibited any caste-based discrimination and laid the foundations of policies to reverse the injustices of the caste system. If a person who lived a century ago were to return to India, she would be greatly surprised at the change that has come about in the country. Yet caste has not disappeared from contemporary India. Some of the older aspects of caste have persisted. Even now most people marry within their own caste or tribe. Untouchability has not ended completely, despite constitutional prohibition. Effects of centuries of advantages and disadvantages continue to be felt today. The caste groups that had access to education under the old system have done very well in acquiring modern education as well. Those groups that did not have access to education or were prohibited from acquiring it have naturally lagged behind. That is why there is a disproportionately large presence of  upper caste  among the urban middle classes in our country. Caste continues to be closely linked to economic status. Caste in politics As in the case of communalism, casteism is rooted in the belief that caste is the sole basis of social community. According to this way of thinking, people belonging to the same caste belong to a natural social community and have the same interests which they do not share with anyone from another caste. As we saw in the case of communalism, such a belief is not borne out by our experience. Caste is one aspect of our experience but it is not the only relevant or the most Caste can take various forms  	 When parties choose candidates in elections, they keep in mind the caste composition of the electorate and nominate candidates from different castes so as to muster necessary support to win elections. When governments are formed, political parties usually take care that representatives of different castes and tribes find a place in it.  	 Political parties and candidates in elections make appeals to caste sentiment to muster support. Some political parties are known to favour some castes and are seen as their  	 Universal adult franchise and the principle of one-person-one-vote of population from rural areas to urban mobility: Shift from one occupation to when a new generation takes up than those practiced by their ancestors. Caste hierarchy: A in which all the caste groups are placed from the  highest  to the  lowest  castes. I don t care what my caste is. Why are we discussing all this in the textbook? Are we Now you don t like it! Didn t you tell me that wherever there is domination, we should discuss it in Political Science? Will caste disappear if we keep mum Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e Caste inequality today Caste is an important source of economic inequality because it regulates access to resources of various kinds.  For example, in the past, the so-called  untouchable  castes were denied the right to own land, while only the so-called  twice born  castes had the right to education.  Although this kind of explicit and formalised inequality based on caste is now outlawed, the effects of centuries of accumulated advantages and disadvantages continue to be felt.  Moreover, new kinds of inequalities have also developed. The relationship between caste and economic status has certainly changed a lot.  Today, it is possible to find very rich and very poor people in every caste, whether  low  or  high.  This was not true even twenty or thirty years ago   it was very rare indeed to find rich people among the  lowest  castes. However, as this evidence from the National Sample Survey shows, caste continues to be very strongly linked to economic status in many important ways: The average economic status (measured by criteria like monthly consumption expenditure) of caste groups still follows the old hierarchy   the  upper  castes are best off, the Dalits and Adivasis are worst off, and the backward classes are in between. Although every caste has some poor members, the proportion living in extreme poverty (below the official  poverty line ) is much higher for the lowest castes and much lower for the upper castes, with the backward classes once again in between. Although every caste has some members who are rich, the upper castes are heavily over-represented among the rich while the lower castes are severely Percentage of population living below the poverty line, 1999 2000 Caste and Community groups Other Backward Classes Muslim Upper Castes Hindu Upper Castes Christian Upper Castes Sikh Upper Castes Other Upper Castes Note:  Upper Caste  here means those who are not from SC, ST, or OBC. Below the poverty line means those who spent `327 or less per person per month in rural and `454 or less per person per month in urban areas. Source: National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Government of India, 55th Round, 1999 2000 De moc ra tic  Polit ics compelled political leaders to gear up to the task of mobilising and securing political support. It also brought new consciousness among the people of castes that were hitherto treated as inferior and low. The focus on caste in politics can sometimes give an impression that elections are all about caste and nothing else. That is far from true. Just consider these:  	 No parliamentary constituency in the country has a clear majority of one single caste. So, every candidate and party needs to win the confidence of more than one caste and community to win elections.  	 No party wins the votes of all the voters of a caste or community. When people say that a caste is a  vote bank  of one party, it usually means that a large proportion of the voters from that caste vote for  	 Many political parties may put up candidates from the same caste (if that caste is believed to dominate the electorate in a particular constituency). Some voters have more than one candidate from their caste while many voters have no candidate from their caste.  	 The ruling party and the sitting MP or MLA frequently lose elections in our country. That could not have happened if all castes and communities were frozen in their Clearly, while caste matters in electoral politics, so do many other factors. The voters have strong attachment to political parties which is often stronger than their attachment to their caste or community. People within the same caste or community have different interests depending on their economic condition. Rich and poor or men and women from the same caste often vote very differently. People s assessment of the performance of the government and the popularity rating of the leaders matter and are often decisive Politics in caste We have so far looked at what caste does to politics. But it does not mean that there is only a one-way relation between caste and politics. Politics too influences the caste system and caste identities by bringing them into the political arena. Thus, it is not politics that gets caste-ridden, it   Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons Do you think that political leaders are right to treat people belonging to a caste as  vote banks ? Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e is the caste that gets politicised. This takes several forms:  	 Each caste group tries to become bigger by incorporating within it neighbouring castes or sub-castes which were earlier excluded from it.  	 Various caste groups are required to enter into a coalition with other castes or communities and thus enter into a dialogue and negotiation.  	 New kinds of caste groups have come up in the political arena like  backward  and  forward  Thus, caste plays different kinds of roles in politics. In some situations, expression of caste differences in politics gives many disadvantaged communities the space to demand their share of power. In this sense, caste politics has helped people from Dalits and OBC castes to gain better access to decision making. Several political and non-political organisations have been demanding and agitating for an end to discrimination against particular castes, for more dignity and more access to land, resources At the same time, exclusive attention to caste can produce negative results as well. As in the case of religion, politics based on caste identity alone is not very healthy in a democracy. It can divert attention from other pressing issues like poverty, development and corruption. In some cases, caste division leads to tensions, conflict and even violence. De moc ra tic  Polit ics 1.	 Mention different aspects of life in which women are discriminated or disadvantaged in India. 2. 	 State different forms of communal politics with one example each. 3.	 State how caste inequalities are still continuing in India. 4. 	 State two reasons to say that caste alone cannot determine election results in India. 5. 	 What is the status of women s representation in India s legislative 6. 	 Mention any two constitutional provisions that make India a secular 7. 	 When we speak of gender divisions, we usually refer to: (a)	Biological difference between men and women (b)	Unequal roles assigned by the society to men and women (c)	Unequal child sex ratio (d)	Absence of voting rights for women in democracies 8. 	 In India seats are reserved for women in (a)	Lok Sabha (b)	State legislative assemblies (d)	Panchayati Raj bodies 9.	 Consider the following statements on the meaning of communal politics. Communal politics is based on the belief that: A.	 One religion is superior to that of others. B.	 People belonging to different religions can live together happily as C.	 Followers of a particular religion constitute one community. D.	 State power cannot be used to establish the domination of one religious group over others. Which of the statements are correct? (a) A, B, C, and D	   (b) A, B, and D   (c) A and C   (d) B and D 10.	Which among the following statements about India s Constitution is (a)	prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion. (b)	gives official status to one religion. (c)	provides to all individuals freedom to profess any religion. (d)	ensures equality of citizens within religious communities. 11.	Social divisions based on _________ are peculiar to India. Ge nde r, R elig io n and  C ast e A person who believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men A person who says that religion is the principal basis of community A person who thinks that caste is the principal basis of community A person who does not discriminate others on the basis of religious beliefs 12.	Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the Lists: De moc ra tic  Polit ics In this tour of democracy, we have come across political parties several times. In Class IX, we noticed the role of political parties in the rise of democracies, in the formation of constitutional designs, in electoral politics and in the making and working of governments. In this textbook, we have glanced at political parties as vehicles of federal sharing of political power and as negotiators of social divisions in the arena of democratic politics. Before concluding this tour, let us take a close look at the nature and working of political parties, especially in our country. We begin by asking two common questions: Why do we need parties? How many parties are good for a democracy? In the light of these, we introduce the national and regional political parties in today s India and then look at what is wrong with political parties and what can be done about it. Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Why do we need political parties? Political parties are easily one of the most visible institutions in a democracy. For most ordinary citizens, democracy is equal to political parties. If you travel to remote parts of our country and speak to the less educated citizens, you could come across people who may not know anything about our Constitution or about the nature of our government. But chances are that they would know something about our political parties. At the same time, this visibility does not mean popularity. Most people tend to be very critical of political parties. They tend to blame parties for all that is wrong with our democracy and our political life. Parties have become identified with social and Therefore, it is natural to ask do we need political parties at all? About hundred years ago, there were few countries of the world that had any political party. Now there are few that do not have parties. Why did political parties become so omnipresent in democracies all over the world? Let us first answer what political parties are and what they do, before we say why we need them. A political party is a group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government. They agree on some policies and programmes for the society with a view to promote the collective good. Since there can be different views on what is good for So, you agree with me. Parties partisan and lead That is their real Election Commission has officially banned wall writing by parties during election times. Most political parties argue that was the cheapest way for their campaign. These election times used to create amazing graffiti on the walls. Here are some examples from Tamil Nadu.   (1) M Govarthan (2) A Muralidharan (3) M Moorthy (4) T Singaravelou, The Hindu De moc ra tic  Polit ics Partisan: A person who is strongly committed to a party, group or is marked by a tendency to take a side and inability to take a balanced view on an issue.   RK Laxman - Brushing up the years all, parties try to persuade people why their policies are better than others. They seek to implement these policies by winning popular support through elections. Thus, parties reflect fundamental political divisions in a society. Parties are about a part of the society and thus, involve partisanship. Thus, a party is known by which part it stands for, which policies it supports and whose interests it upholds. A political party has three components:  	 the leaders,  	 the active members and  	 the followers What does a political party do? Basically,  political parties fill political offices and exercise political power. Parties do so by performing a series 1 	 Parties contest elections. In most democracies, elections are fought mainly among the candidates put up by political parties. Parties select their candidates in different ways. In some countries, such as the USA, members and supporters of a party choose its candidates. Now more and more countries are following this method. In other countries like India, top party leaders choose candidates for contesting elections. 2 	 Parties put forward different policies and programmes and the voters choose from them. Each of us may have different opinions and views on what policies are suitable for the society. But no government can handle such a large variety of views. In a democracy, a large number of similar opinions have to be grouped together to provide a direction in which policies can be formulated by the governments. This is what the parties do. A party reduces a vast multitude of opinions into a few basic positions which it Po lit ica l Pa r tie s that we can t But tell me on what grounds do people support a supports. A government is expected to base its policies on the line taken by the ruling party. 3 	 Parties play a decisive role in making laws for a country. Formally, laws are debated and passed in the legislature. But since most of the members belong to a party, they go by the direction of the party leadership, irrespective of their personal opinions. 4 	 Parties form and run governments. As we noted last year, the big policy decisions are taken by political executive that comes from the political parties. Parties recruit leaders, train them and then make them ministers to run the government in the way they want. 5 	 Those parties that lose in the elections play the role of opposition to the parties in power, by voicing different views and criticising government for its failures or wrong policies. Opposition parties also mobilise opposition to the 6 	 Parties shape public opinion. They raise and highlight issues. Parties have lakhs of members and activists spread all over the country. Many of the pressure groups are the extensions of political parties among different sections of society. Parties sometimes also launch movements for the resolution of problems faced by people. Often opinions in the society crystallise on the lines 7 	 Parties provide people access to government machinery and welfare schemes implemented by governments. For an ordinary citizen it is easy to approach a local party leader than a government officer. That is why, they feel close to parties even when they do not fully trust them.  Parties have to be responsive to people s needs and demands. Otherwise people can reject those parties in the next elections. This list of functions in a sense answers the question asked above: we need political parties because they perform all these functions. But we still need to ask why modern democracies cannot exist without political parties.  We can understand the necessity of political parties by imagining a situation without parties. Every candidate in the elections will be independent. So no one will be able to make any promises to the people about any major policy changes. The government may be formed, but its utility will remain ever uncertain. Elected representatives will be accountable to their constituency for what they do in the locality. But no one will be responsible for how the country will be run. We can also think about it by looking at the non-party based elections to the panchayat in many states. Although, the parties do not contest formally, it is generally noticed that the village gets split into more than one faction, each of which puts up a  panel  of its candidates. This is exactly what the party does. That is the reason we find political parties in almost all countries of the world, whether these countries are big or small, old or new, developed The rise of political parties is directly linked to the emergence of representative democracies. Ruling Party: Political party that runs De moc ra tic  Polit ics As we have seen, large societies need representative democracy. As societies became large and complex, they also needed some agency to gather different views on various issues and to present these to the government. They needed some ways, to bring various representatives together so that a Categorise these photographs by the functions of political parties they illustrate. Find one photograph or news clipping from your own area for each of the functions listed above. responsible government could be formed. They needed a mechanism to support or restrain the government, make policies, justify or oppose them. Political parties fulfill these needs that every representative government has. We can say that parties are a necessary condition for How many parties should we have? In a democracy any group of citizens is free to form a political party.  In this formal sense, there are a large number of political parties in each country. More than 750 parties are registered with the Election Commission of India. But not all these parties are serious contenders in the elections. Usually only a handful of parties are effectively in the race to win elections and form the government. So the question is: how many major or effective parties are good for a democracy? In some countries, only one party is allowed to control and run the government. These are called one-party systems. In Class IX, we noted that in China, only the Communist Party is allowed to 1:	 Activists of BJP Mahila Morcha demonstrate against hike in prices of onions and LPG in 2:	 Minister distributes ` One lakh cheque to the families of hooch victims at their houses. 3:	 Activists of CPI (M), CPI, OGP and JD (S) take out a rally in Bhubaneswar to protest against POSCO, the Korean steel company for being permitted by the State Government to export iron ore from Orissa to feed steel plants in China and Korea.   (1) C V Subrahmanyan (2) K Gopinathan (3) A Chakrabarty, The Hindu Po lit ica l Pa r tie s rule. Although, legally speaking, people are free to form political parties, it does not happen because the electoral system does not permit free competition for power. We cannot consider one-party system as a good option because this is not a democratic option. Any democratic system must allow at least two parties to compete in elections and provide a fair chance for the competing parties to come to power. In some countries, power usually changes between two main parties. Several other parties may exist, contest elections and win a few seats in the national legislatures. But only the two main parties have a serious chance of winning majority of seats to form government. Such a party system is called two-party system. The United States of America and the United Kingdom are examples of two-party system. If several parties compete for power, and more than two parties have a reasonable chance of coming to power either on their own strength or in alliance with others, we call it a multiparty system. Thus in India, we have a multiparty system. In this system, the government is formed by various parties coming together in a coalition. When several parties in a multi-party system join hands for the purpose of contesting elections and winning power, it is called an alliance or a front. For example, in India there were three such major alliances in 2004 parliamentary elections  the National Democratic Alliance, the United Progressive Alliance and the Left Front. The multiparty system often appears very messy and leads to political instability. At the same time, this system allows a variety of interests and opinions to enjoy So, which of these is better? Perhaps the best answer to this very common question is that this is not a very good question. Party system is not something any country can choose. It evolves over a long time, depending on the nature of society, its social and regional divisions, its history of politics and its system of elections. These cannot be changed very quickly. Each country develops a party system that is conditioned by its special circumstances. For example, if India has evolved a multiparty system, it is because the social and geographical diversity in such a large country is not easily absorbed by two or even three parties. No system is ideal for all countries and all situations. I wonder how coalitions. I can t the names of all Let us apply what we have learnt about party systems to the various states within India. Here are three major types of party systems that exist at the State level. Can you find the names of at least two States for each of these types?   Two-party system   Multiparty system with two alliances De moc ra tic  Polit ics participation It is often said that political parties are facing a crisis because they are very unpopular and the citizens are indifferent to political parties. The available evidence shows that this belief is only partly true for India. The evidence, based on a series of large sample surveys conducted over several decades, shows that: Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people in South Asia. The proportion of those who say their trust in political parties is  not much  or  not at all  is more than those who have  some  or  great  trust. The same is true of most other democracies as well. Political parties are one of the least trusted institutions all over the world. Yet the level of participation in the activities of political parties was fairly high. The proportion of those who said they were members of some political party was higher in India than many advanced countries like Canada, Japan, Spain and South Korea. Over the last three decades, the proportion of those who report to be members of political parties in India has gone up steadily. The proportion of those who say they feel  close to a political party  has also gone up in India in this Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007 Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Democracies that follow a federal system all over the world tend to have two kinds of political parties: parties that are present in only one of the federal units and parties that are present in several or all units of the federation. This is the case in India as well. There are some country-wide parties, which are called  national parties. These parties have their units in various states. But by and large, all these units follow the same policies, programmes and strategy that is decided at the national level. Every party in the country has to register with the Election Commission. While the Commission treats all parties equally, it offers some special facilities to large and established parties.  These parties are given a unique symbol   only cial candidates of that party can use that election symbol. Parties that get this privilege and some other special facilities are  recognised  by the Election Commission for this purpose. That is why these parties are called,  recognised political parties. The Election Commission has laid down detailed criteria of the proportion of votes and seats that a party must get in order to be a recognised party. A party that secures at least six per cent of the total votes in an election to the Legislative Assembly of a State and wins at least two seats is recognised as a State party. A party that secures at least six per cent of the total votes in Lok Sabha elections or Assembly elections in four States and wins at least four seats in the Lok Sabha is recognised as a national party. According to this classi  there are six recognized national parties in the country as per notification of the Election Commission of India issued in 2023. Does the cartoon re  ect the data graphics shown on the Crunching the  Numbers   Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc. For more details and recognition of political parties by the of India, visit  https:/ De moc ra tic  Polit ics Aam Aadmi Party (AAP): Formed on 26 November 2012, following the 2011 anti-corruption movement. The party was founded on the idea of accountability, clean administration, transparency and good governance. In the year after its formation, AAP emerged as the second largest party in the Delhi Legislative Assembly election. It formed a government with the support of Indian National Congress (INC). It also emerged as the third front in the politics of Gujarat after 2022 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election. Presently, AAP formed governments in Punjab and Delhi. In the Lok Sabha election held in 2019, it secured one seat in the Lok P a r t y  ( B S P ): Formed in 1984 under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. Seeks to represent and secure power for the bahujan samaj which includes the dalits, adivasis, OBCs and religious minorities. Draws inspiration from the ideas and teachings of Sahu Maharaj, Mahatma Phule, Periyar Ramaswami Naicker and Babasaheb Ambedkar. Stands for the cause of securing the interests and welfare of the dalits and oppressed people. It has its main base in the state of Uttar Pradesh and substantial presence in neighbouring states like Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Delhi and Punjab. Formed government in Uttar Pradesh several times by taking the support of different parties at different times. In the Lok Sabha elections held in 2019, it polled about 3.63 per cent votes and secured 10 seats in the Lok Sabha. Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP): Founded in 1980 by reviving the erstwhile Bharatiya Jana Sangh, formed by Syama Prasad Mukherjee in 1951. Wants to build a strong and modern India by drawing inspiration from India s ancient culture and values; and Deendayal Upadhyaya s ideas of integral humanism and Antyodaya. Cultural nationalism (or  Hindutva ) is an important element in its conception of Indian nationhood and politics. Wants full territorial and political integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India, a uniform civil code for all people living in the country irrespective of religion, and ban on religious conversions. Its support base increased substantially in the 1990s. Earlier limited to north and west and to urban areas, the party expanded its support in the south, east, the north-east and to rural areas. Came to power in 1998 as the leader of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) including several regional parties. Emerged as the largest party with 303 members in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Currently leads the ruling NDA government at of India - Marxist in 1964. Believes in Marxism-Leninism. Supports s o c i a l i s m,  s e c u l a r i s m  a n d democracy and opposes imperialism and communalism. Accepts democratic elections as a useful and helpful means for securing the objective of socio-economic justice in India. Enjoys strong support in West Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Bengal, Kerala and Tripura, especially among the poor, factory workers, farmers, agricultural labourers and the intelligentsia. Critical of the new economic policies that allow free flow of foreign capital and goods into the country. Was in power in West Bengal without a break for 34 years. In the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, it won about 1.75 per cent of votes and 3 seats. Indian National Congress (INC): Popularly known as the Congress Party. One of the oldest parties of the world. Founded in 1885 and has experienced many splits. Played a dominant role in Indian politics at the national and state level for several decades after India s Independence. Under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, the party sought to build a modern secular democratic republic in India. Ruling party at the centre till 1977 and then from 1980 to 1989. After 1989, its support declined, but it continues to be present throughout the country, cutting across social divisions. A centrist party (neither rightist nor leftist) in its ideological orientation, the party espouses secularism and welfare of weaker sections and minorities. The INC supports new economic reforms but with a human face.  Leader of the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government from 2004 to 2019. In the 2019 Lok Sabha election, it won 19.5% votes and 52 seats. National People s Party (NPP): Formed in July 2013 under the leadership of P.A Sangma. NPP is the first political party from North East India to have attained the status of a national party. It believes in diversity of the country and recognizes that different regions have different developmental challenges. The core philosophy of the party is education and employment to all as well as empowerment of all sections of the society. It formed government in Meghalaya and has presence in many of North Eastern States. In the Lok Sabha election held in 2019, NPP secured one seat in the Lok Sabha. Other than these seven parties, most of the major parties of the country are classified by the Election Commission as  State parties. These are commonly referred to as regional parties. Yet these parties need not be regional in their ideology or outlook. Some of these parties are all India parties that happen to have succeeded only in some states. Parties like the Samajwadi Party and Rashtriya Janata Dal have national level political organisation with units in several states. Some of these parties like Biju Janata Dal, Sikkim Democratic Front,  Mizo National Front and Telangana Rashtra Samithi are conscious about their State identity. Over the last three decades, the number and strength of these parties has expanded. This made the Parliament of India politically more and more diverse. No one national party is able to secure on its own a majority in the Lok Sabha, until 2014. As a result, the national parties are compelled to form alliances with State parties. Since 1996, nearly every one of the State parties has got an opportunity to be a part of one or the other national level coalition government. This has contributed to the strengthening of federalism and democracy in our country. (See the map on the next page for details of De moc ra tic  Polit ics Map not to scale Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Challenges to political parties We have seen how crucial political parties are for the working of democracy. Since parties are the most visible face of democracy, it is natural that people blame parties for whatever is wrong with the working of democracy. All over the world, people express strong dissatisfaction with the failure of political parties to perform their functions well. This is the case in our country too. Popular dissatisfaction and criticism has focussed on four problem areas in the working of political parties. Political parties need to face and overcome these challenges in order to remain effective instruments The first challenge is lack of internal democracy within parties. All over the world there is a tendency in political parties towards the concentration of power in one or few leaders at the top. Parties do not keep membership registers, do not hold organisational meetings, and do not conduct internal elections regularly. Ordinary members of the party do not get sufficient information on what happens inside the party. They do not have the means or the connections needed to influence the decisions. As a result, the leaders power to make decisions in the name of the party. Since one or few in the party, those who disagree with the leadership find to women? Is that also due to lack of internal Berlusconi was the Prime Minister of Italy. He is also one of the top businessmen in Italy. He is the leader of the Forza Italia founded in 1993. His company owns TV channels, the most important publishing company, a foot ball club (AC Milan) and a bank. This cartoon was made during the last elections.   Riber Hansson - Svenska Dagbladet, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Berlusconi Puppet Theatre De moc ra tic  Polit ics it difficult to continue in the party. More than loyalty to party principles and policies, personal loyalty to the leader becomes more important. The second challenge of dynastic succession is related to the first one. Since most political parties do not practice open and transparent procedures for their functioning, there are very few ways for an ordinary worker to rise to the top in a party. Those who happen to be the leaders are in a position of unfair advantage to favour people close to them or even their family members. In many parties, the top positions are always controlled by members of one family. This is unfair to other members of that party. This is also bad for democracy, since people who do not have adequate experience or popular support come to occupy positions of power. This tendency is present in some measure all over the world, including in some of the The third challenge is about the growing role of money and muscle power in parties, especially during elections. Since parties are focussed only on winning elections, they tend to use short-cuts to win elections. They tend to nominate those candidates who have or can raise lots of money. Rich people and companies who give funds to the parties tend to have influence on the policies and decisions of the party. In some cases, parties support criminals who can win elections. Democrats all over the world are worried about the increasing role of rich people and big companies in democratic politics. The fourth challenge is that very often parties do not seem to offer a meaningful choice to the voters. In order to offer meaningful choice, parties must be significantly different. In recent years, there has been a decline in the ideological differences among parties in most parts of the world. For example, the difference between the Labour Party and the Conservative Party in Britain is very little. They agree on more fundamental aspects but differ only in details on how policies are to be framed and implemented. In our country too, the differences among all the major parties on the economic policies have reduced. Those who want really different policies have no option available to them. Sometimes people cannot even elect very different leaders either, because the same set of leaders keep shifting from one party to another.   Huffaker - Cagle Cartoons Inc.,  16 June 2004 This cartoon was drawn during the Presidency of George Bush of the Republican Party in the USA. The party s symbol is elephant. The cartoon seems to suggest that the Corporate America controls all major institutions of the country. Po lit ica l Pa r tie s How can parties be reformed? In order to face these challenges, political parties need to be reformed. The question is: Are political parties willing to reform? If they are willing, what has prevented them from reforming so far? If they are not willing, is it possible to force them to reform? Citizens all over the world face this question. This is not a simple question to answer. In a democracy, the final decision is made by leaders who represent political parties. People can replace them, but only by another set of party leaders. If all of them do not wish to reform, how can anyone force them Let us look at some of the recent efforts and suggestions in our country to reform political parties and its leaders:  	 The Constitution was amended to prevent elected MLAs and MPs from changing parties. This was done because many elected representatives were indulging in defection in order to become ministers or for cash rewards. Now the law says that if party allegiance from the party on which a person got elected (to a legislative body) to a different party. Can you identify which of the challenges described in this section are being highlighted in these cartoons (on pages 57 to 59)? What are the ways to curb the misuse of money and muscle power in politics? elections only to But isn t it true that there of the people?   Manjul - DNA De moc ra tic  Polit ics any MLA or MP changes parties, he or she will lose the seat in the legislature. This new law has helped bring defection down. At the same time, this has made any dissent even more difficult. MPs and MLAs have to accept whatever the party leaders  	 The Supreme Court passed an order to reduce the influence of money and criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to file an affidavit giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him. The new system has made a lot of information available to the public. But there is no system to check if the information given by the candidates is true. As yet we do not know if it has led to decline in the influence of the rich and the criminals.  	 The Election Commission passed an order making it necessary for political parties to hold their organisational elections and file their income tax returns. The parties have started doing so but sometimes it is mere formality. It is not clear if this step has led to greater internal democracy in political parties. Besides these, many suggestions are often made to reform political  	 A law should be made to regulate the internal affairs of political parties. It should be made compulsory for political parties to maintain a register of its members, to follow its own constitution, to have an independent authority, to act as a judge in case of party disputes, to hold open elections to the highest posts.  	 It should be made mandatory for political parties to give a minimum number of tickets, about one-third, to women candidates. Similarly, there should be a quota for women in the decision making bodies of  	 There should be state funding of elections. The government should give parties money to support their election expenses. This support could be given in kind: petrol, paper, telephone, etc. Or it could be given in cash on the basis of the votes secured by the party in the last election. These suggestions have not yet been accepted by political parties. If and when these are accepted these could lead to some improvement. But we must be very careful about legal solutions to political problems. Over-regulation of political parties can be counter-productive. This would force all parties to find ways to cheat the law. Besides, political parties will not agree to pass a law that they do not like. There are two other ways in which political parties can be reformed. One, people can put Affidavit: A signed to an officer, where a person makes a sworn statement regarding her Do you agree that this form of reforming political parties will be acceptable to them?   Keshav - The Hindu Po lit ica l Pa r tie s pressure on political parties. This can be done through petitions, publicity and agitations. Ordinary citizens, pressure groups and movements and the media can play an important role in this. If political parties feel that they would lose public support by not taking up reforms, they would become more serious about reforms. Two, political parties can improve if those who want this, join political parties. The quality of democracy depends on the degree of public participation. It is difficult to reform politics if ordinary citizens do not take part in it and simply criticise it from the outside. The problem of bad politics can be solved by more and better politics. We shall return to this theme in the final chapter. 1.	 State the various functions political parties perform in a democracy. 2.	 What are the various challenges faced by political parties? 3. 	 Suggest some reforms to strengthen parties so that they perform their functions well? 4.	 What is a political party? 5. 	 What are the characteristics of a political party? 6. 	 A group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government is called a _____________________. 7.	 Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: 8.	 Who among the following is the founder of the Bahujan Samaj A.	 Kanshi Ram B.	 Sahu Maharaj C. 	B.R. Ambedkar D. 	Jotiba Phule 9.	 What is the guiding philosophy of the Bharatiya Janata Party? A. 	Bahujan Samaj B. 	Revolutionary democracy C. 	Integral humanism A. National Democratic Alliance Bharatiya Janata Party B. State party Communist Party of India (Marxist) C. United Progressive Alliance Telugu Desam Party D. Left Front De moc ra tic  Polit ics 10. Consider the following statements on parties. A.	 Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people. B.	 Parties are often rocked by scandals involving top party leaders. C.	 Parties are not necessary to run governments. Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B, and C   (b) A and B   (c) B and C   (d) A and C Read the following passage and answer the questions given Muhammad Yunus is a famous economist of Bangladesh. He received several international honours for his efforts to promote economic and social development for the benefit of the poor. He and the Grameen Bank that he started jointly, received the Nobel Peace Prize for the year 2006. In February 2007, he decided to launch a political party and contest in the parliamentary elections. His objective was to foster proper leadership, good governance and build a new Bangladesh. He felt that only a political party different from the traditional ones would bring about new political culture. His party would be democratic from the grassroots level. The launching of the new party, called Nagarik Shakti (Citizens  Power), has caused a stir among the Bangladeshis. While many welcomed his decision, some did not like it.  Now I think Bangladesh will have a chance to choose between good and bad and eventually have a good government,  said Shahedul Islam, a government official.  That government, we hope, would not only keep itself away from corruption but also make fighting corruption and black money a top priority.  But leaders of traditional political parties who dominated the country s politics for decades were apprehensive.  There was no debate (over him) winning the Nobel, but politics is different   very challenging and often controversial,  said a senior leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. Some others were highly critical. They asked why he was rushing into politics.  Is he being planted in politics by mentors from outside the country,  asked one political observer. Do you think Yunus made a right decision to float a new political Do you agree with the statements and fears expressed by various people? How do you want this new party organised to make it different from other parties? If you were the one to begin this political party, how would you defend it? Out co me s o f De mo crac y As we begin to wind up our tour of democracy, it is time to move beyond our discussion of specific themes and ask a general set of questions: What does democracy do? Or, what outcomes can we reasonably expect of democracy? Also, does democracy fulfil these expectations in real life? We begin by thinking about how to assess the outcomes of democracy. After some clarity on how to think on this subject, we proceed to look at the expected and actual outcomes of democracy in various respects: quality of government, economic well-being, inequality, social differences and conflict and finally freedom and dignity. De moc ra tic  Polit ics How do we assess democracy s outcomes? Do you remember how students in Madam Lyngdoh s class argued about democracy? This was in Chapter 2 of Class IX textbook. It emerged from that conversation that democracy is a better form of government when compared with dictatorship or any other alternative. We felt that democracy was better  	 Promotes equality among  	 Enhances the dignity of the  	 Improves the quality of  	 Provides a method to resolve  	 Allows room to correct mistakes. Are these expectations realised under democracies? When we talk to people around us, most of them support democracy against other alternatives, such as rule by a monarch or military or religious leaders. But not so many of them would be satisfied with the democracy in practice. So we face a dilemma: democracy is seen to be good in principle, but felt to be not so good in its practice. This dilemma invites us to think hard about the outcomes of democracy. Do we prefer democracy only for moral reasons? Or are there some prudential reasons to support Over a hundred countries of the world today claim and practice some kind of democratic politics: they have formal constitutions, they hold elections, they have parties and they guarantee rights of citizens. While these features are common to most of them, these democracies are very much different from each other in terms of their social situations, their economic achievements and their cultures. Clearly, what may be achieved or not achieved under each of these democracies will be very different. But is there something that we can expect from every democracy, just because it is democracy? Our interest in and fascination for democracy often pushes us into taking a position that democracy can address all socio-economic and political problems. If some of our expectations are not met, we start blaming the idea of democracy. Or, we start doubting if we are living in a democracy. The first step towards thinking carefully about the outcomes of democracy is to recognise that democracy is just a form of government. It can only create conditions for achieving something. The citizens have to take advantage of those conditions and achieve those goals. Let us examine some of the things we can reasonably expect from democracy and examine the record of democracy. I loved that   RK Laxman - Brushing up the years Is democracy all about coping with multiple pressures and accommodating diverse demands? Out co me s o f De mo crac y Accountable, responsive and legitimate government There are some things that democracy must provide. In a democracy, we are most concerned with ensuring that people will have the right to choose their rulers and people will have control over the rulers. Whenever possible and necessary, citizens should be able to participate in decision making, that affects them all. Therefore, the most basic outcome of democracy should be that it produces a government that is accountable to the citizens, and responsive to the needs and expectations of the citizens. Before we go into this question, we face another common question: Is the democratic government efficient? Is it effective? Some people think that democracy produces less effective government. It is, of course, true that non-democratic rulers do not have to bother about deliberation in assemblies or worry about majorities and public opinion. So, they can be very quick and efficient in decision making and implementation. Democracy is based on the idea of deliberation and negotiation. So, some delay is bound to take place. Does that make democratic government inefficient? Let us think in terms of costs. Imagine a government that may take decisions very fast. But it may take decisions that are not accepted by the people and may therefore face problems. In contrast, the democratic government will take more time to follow procedures before arriving at a decision. But because it has followed procedures, its decisions may be both more acceptable to the people and more effective. So, the cost of time that democracy pays is perhaps worth it. Now look at the other side  democracy ensures that decision making will be based on norms and procedures. So, a citizen who wants to know if a decision was taken through the correct procedures can find this out. She has the right and the means to examine the process of decision making. This is known as transparency. This factor is often missing from a Therefore, when we are trying to find out the outcomes of democracy, it is right to expect democracy to produce a government that follows procedures and is accountable to the people. We can also expect that the democratic government develops mechanisms for citizens to hold the government accountable and mechanisms for citizens to take part in decision making whenever they If you wanted to measure democracies on the basis of this expected outcome, you would look for the following practices and institutions: regular, free and fair elections; open public debate on   Mike Keefe  - Cagle Cartoons Inc. Can you think of what and how the about you and your family (for example ration cards and voter identity cards)? What are the sources of information for you about the De moc ra tic  Polit ics So, the best is that it is a is what we have all this mental major policies and legislations; and citizens  right to information about the government and its functioning. The actual performance of democracies shows a mixed record on this. Democracies have had greater success in setting up regular and free elections and in setting up conditions for open public debate. But most democracies fall short of elections that provide a fair chance to everyone and in subjecting every decision to public debate. Democratic governments do not have a very good record when it comes to sharing information with citizens. All one can say in favour of democratic regimes is that they are much better than any n o n - d e m o c r a t i c  r e g i m e  i n In substantive terms, it may be reasonable to expect from democracy a government that is attentive to the needs and demands of the people and is largely free of corruption. The record of democracies is not impressive on these two counts. Democracies often frustrate the needs of the people and often ignore the demands of a majority of its population. The routine tales of corruption are enough to convince us that democracy is not free of this evil. At the same time, there is nothing to show that non-democracies are less corrupt or more sensitive to There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its alternatives: demo- cratic government is legitimate government. It may be slow, less efficient, not always very responsive or clean. But a democratic government is people s own government. That is why, there is an overwhelming support for the idea of democracy all over the world. As the accompanying evidence from South Asia shows, the support exists in countries with democratic regimes as well as countries without democratic regimes. People wish to be ruled by representatives elected by them. They also believe that democracy is suitable for their country. Democracy s ability to generate its own support is itself an outcome that cannot be ignored. Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007 Democracy is preferred Those who agree with one of Very few doubt the suitability of democracy for their own country How suitable is democracy for your country? Overwhelming support for democracy Those who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the people matter to me Bangladesh	 India	 Nepal	Pakistan	Sri Lanka Out co me s o f De mo crac y Economic growth and development If democracies are expected to produce good governments, then is it not fair to expect that they would also produce development? Evidence shows that in practice, many democracies did not fulfil this If you consider all democracies and all dictatorships for the fifty years between 1950 and 2000, dictatorships have slightly higher rate of economic growth. The inability of democracy to achieve higher economic development worries us. But this alone cannot be reason to reject democracy. As you have already studied in economics, economic development depends on several factors: country s population The Rich Get Buff size, global situation, cooperation from other countries, economic priorities adopted by the country, etc. However, the difference in the rates of economic development between less developed countries with dictatorships and democracies is negligible. Overall, we cannot say that democracy is a guarantee of economic development. But we can expect democracy not to lag behind dictatorships in this respect. When we find such significant difference in the rates of economic growth between countries under dictatorship and democracy, it is better to prefer democracy as it has several other positive outcomes.   RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc. Cartoon on this page and next three pages tell us about the disparities between the rich and poor.  Should the gains of economic growth be evenly distributed? How can the poor get a voice for a better share in a nation? What can the poor countries do to receive a greater share in the world s wealth? De moc ra tic  Polit ics Arguments about democracy tend to be very passionate. This is how it should be, for democracy appeals to some of our deep values. These debates cannot be resolved in a simple manner. But some debates about democracy can and should be resolved by referring to some facts and figures. The debate about the economic outcomes of democracy is one such debate. Over the years, many students of democracy have gathered careful evidence to see what the relationship of democracy with economic growth and economic inequalities is. The tables and the cartoon here present some of the evidences: Table 1 shows that on an average dictatorial regimes have had a slightly better record of economic growth. But when we compare their record only in poor countries, there is virtually no difference. Table 2 shows that within democracies there can be very high degree of inequalities. In democratic countries like South Africa and Brazil, the top 20 per cent people take away more than 60 per cent of the national income, leaving less than 3 per cent for the bottom 20 per cent population. Countries like Denmark and Hungary are much better in this You can see in the cartoon, there is often inequality of opportunities available to the What would be your verdict on democracy if you had to base it purely on economic performance of democratic regimes in terms of growth and equal distribution? Rates of economic growth for different countries, 1950   2000 Inequality of income in selected countries Type of regimes and countries All democratic regimes All dictatorial regimes Poor countries under dictatorship 4.34 Poor countries under democracy Name of the % share of national Top 20 % Bottom 20 % United Kingdom 45.0 Source: A Przeworski, M E Alvarez, J A Cheibub and F Limongi, Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1950 -1990. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2000.   Jimmy Margulies - Cagle Cartoons Inc. Out co me s o f De mo crac y Reduction of inequality and poverty Perhaps more than development, it is reasonable to expect democracies to reduce economic disparities. Even when a country achieves economic growth, will wealth be distributed in such a way that all citizens of the country will have a share and lead a better life? Is economic growth in democracies accompanied by increased inequalities among the people? Or do democracies lead to a just distribution of goods and   Ares - Best of Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Democracies are based on political equality. All individuals have equal weight in electing representatives. Parallel to the process of bringing individuals into the political arena on an equal footing, we find growing economic inequalities. A small number of ultra-rich enjoy a highly disproportionate share of wealth and incomes. Not only that, their share in the total income of the country has been increasing. Those at the bottom of the society have very little to depend upon. Their incomes have been declining. Sometimes they find it difficult to meet their basic needs of life, such as food, clothing, house, education and health. In actual life, democracies do not appear to be very successful in reducing economic inequalities. In Class IX Economics textbook, you have already studied about poverty in India. The poor constitute a large proportion of our voters and no party will like to lose their votes. Yet democratically elected governments do not appear to be as keen to address the question of poverty as you would expect them to. The situation is much worse in some other countries. In Bangladesh, more than half of its population lives in poverty. People in several poor countries are now dependent on the rich countries even for Voice of the Poor a rule of the poor are in be a rule of the poor. How can this not be the De moc ra tic  Polit ics World s Wealth Owned by a Few Accommodation of social diversity All you are saying is that people do not This is not we be happy Do democracies lead to peaceful and harmonious life among citizens? It will be a fair expectation that democracy should produce a harmonious social life. We have seen in the earlier chapters how democracies accommodate various social divisions. We saw in the first chapter how Belgium has successfully negotiated differences among ethnic populations. Democracies usually develop a procedure to conduct their competition. This reduces the possibility of these tensions becoming explosive or violent. No society can fully and permanently resolve conflicts among different groups. But we can certainly learn to respect these differences and we can also evolve mechanisms to negotiate the differences. Democracy is best suited to produce this outcome. Non-democratic regimes often turn a blind eye to or suppress internal social differences. Ability to handle social differences, divisions and conflicts is thus a definite plus point of democratic regimes. But the example of Sri Lanka reminds us that a democracy must fulfil two conditions in order to achieve this  	 It is necessary to understand that democracy is not simply rule by majority opinion.  The majority always needs to work with the minority so that governments function to represent the general view. Majority and minority opinions are not permanent.  	 It is also necessary that rule by majority does not become rule by majority community in terms of religion or race or linguistic group, etc.  Rule by majority means that in case of every decision or in case of   Manny Francisco - The Phillippines, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Out co me s o f De mo crac y every election, different persons and groups may and can form a majority. Democracy remains democracy only as long as every citizen has a chance of being in majority at some point The two images depict two different kinds of effects democratic politics can have on social divisions. Take one example for each image and write a paragraph each on the outcome of democratic politics in both situations. of time. If someone is barred from being in majority on the basis of birth, then the democratic rule ceases to be accommodative for that person Dignity and freedom of the citizens Democracy stands much superior to any other form of government in promoting dignity and freedom of the individual. Every individual wants to receive respect from fellow beings. Often conflicts arise among individuals because some feel that they are not treated with due respect. The passion for respect and freedom are the basis of democracy. Democracies throughout the world have recognised this, at least in principle. This has been achieved in various degrees in various democracies. For societies which have been built for long on the basis of subordination and domination, it is not a simple matter to recognise that all individuals are equal. Take the case of dignity of women. Most societies across the world were historically male dominated societies. Long struggles by women have created some sensitivity today that respect to and equal treatment of women are   Ares - Best of Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc. De moc ra tic  Polit ics necessary ingredients of a democratic society. That does not mean that women are actually always treated with respect. But once the principle is recognised, it becomes easier for women to wage a struggle against what is now unacceptable legally and morally. In a non-democratic set up, this unacceptability would not have legal basis because the principle of individual freedom and dignity would not have the legal and moral force there. The same is true of caste inequalities. Democracy in India has strengthened the claims of the disadvantaged and discriminated castes for equal status and equal opportunity. There are instances still of caste-based inequalities and atrocities, but these lack the moral and legal foundations. Perhaps, it is the recognition that makes ordinary citizens value their democratic rights. Expectations from democracy also function as the criteria for judging any democratic country. What is most distinctive about democracy is that its examination never gets over. As democracy passes one test, it produces another test. As people get some benefits of democracy, they ask for more and want to make democracy even better. That is why, when we ask people about the way democracy functions, they will always come up with more expectations, and many complaints. The fact that people are complaining is itself a testimony to the success of democracy: it shows that people have developed awareness and the ability to expect and to look critically at power holders and the high and the mighty. A public expression of dissatisfaction with democracy shows the success of the democratic project: it transforms people from the status of a subject into that of a citizen. Most individuals today believe that their vote makes a difference to the way the government is run and to their own self-interest. The above cartoon and graph illustrate a point made in this section (Dignity and freedom of the citizens). Underline the sentences from this section which connect to the cartoon or graph. I am anxious about my board so many exams. And millions of Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007. Rosa Parks Still Inspires   Pat Bagley - Cagle Cartoons Inc. Belief in the efficacy of vote is placed above the calculus of utility Those who say that their vote makes a difference... Out co me s o f De mo crac y 1.	 How does democracy produce an accountable, responsive and 2.	 What are the conditions under which democracies accommodate 3.	 Give arguments to support or oppose the following assertions:  	 Industrialised countries can afford democracy but the poor need dictatorship to become rich.  	 Democracy can t reduce inequality of incomes between  	 Government in poor countries should spend less on poverty reduction, health, education and spend more on industries  	 In democracy all citizens have one vote, which means that there is absence of any domination and conflict. 4.	 Identify the challenges to democracy in the following descriptions. Also suggest policy/institutional mechanism to deepen democracy in the given situations:  	 Following a High Court directive, a temple in Orissa that had separate entry doors for dalits and non-dalits allowed entry for all from the same door.  	 A large number of farmers are committing suicide in different states of India.  	 Following an allegation of killing of three civilians in Gandwara in a fake encounter by Jammu and Kashmir police, an enquiry has been ordered. 5. 	 In the context of democracies, which of the following ideas is correct  democracies have successfully eliminated: A.	 conflicts among people B.	 economic inequalities among people C.	 differences of opinion about how marginalised sections are to be treated D.	 the idea of political inequality 6. 	 In the context of assessing democracy, which among the following is the odd one out. Democracies need to ensure: A.	 free and fair elections B.	 dignity of the individual C.	 majority rule D.	 equal treatment before law 7.	 Studies on political and social inequalities in democracy show that: A.	 democracy and development go together. B.	 inequalities exist in democracies. C.	 inequalities do not exist under dictatorship. D.	 dictatorship is better than democracy. De moc ra tic  Polit ics 8. 	 Read the passage below: Nannu is a daily wage earner. He lives in Welcome Mazdoor Colony, a slum habitation in East Delhi. He lost his ration card and applied for a duplicate one in January 2004. He made several rounds to the local Food and Civil Supplies office for the next three months. But the clerks and officials would not even look at him, leave alone do his job or bother to tell him the status of his application. Ultimately, he filed an application under the Right to Information Act asking for the daily progress made on his application, names of the officials, who were supposed to act on his application and what action would be taken against these officials for their inaction. Within a week of filing application under the Right to Information Act, he was visited by an inspector from the Food Department, who informed him that the card had been made and he could collect it from the office. When Nannu went to collect his card next day, he was given a very warm treatment by the Food and Supply Officer (FSO), who is the head of a Circle. The FSO offered him tea and requested him to withdraw his application under the Right to Information, since his work had already What does Nannu s example show? What impact did Nannu s action have on officials? Ask your parents their experiences when they approach government officials to attend to their Source: Election Commission of India


=== Class11_Polity ===

Human beings are unique in two respects: they possess reason and the ability to reflect on their actions. They also have the capacity to use language and communicate with each other. Unlike other species, they can express their innermost thoughts and desires; they can share their ideas and discuss what they consider to be good and desirable. Political theory has its roots in the twin aspects of the human self. It analyses certain basic questions such as how should society be organised? Why do we need government? What is the best form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does the state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens? Political theory examines questions of this kind and systematically thinks about the values that inform political life   values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the meaning and significance of these and other related concepts. It clarifies the existing definitions of these concepts by focusing on some major political thinkers of the past and present. It also examines the extent to which freedom or equality are actually present in the institutions that we participate in, everyday life such as schools, shops, buses or trains or government offices. At an advanced level, it looks at whether existing definitions are adequate and how existing institutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices must be modified to become more democratic. The objective of political theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questions and assess the political events of our time. In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics and political theory and why we should study it. 1.1 WHAT IS POLITICS? You would have noticed that people have different ideas about what politics is. Political leaders, and persons who contest elections and hold political office, may argue that it is a kind of public service. Some others associate politics with manipulation and intrigue undertaken to pursue ambitions and satisfy wants. A few think of politics as what politicians do. If they see politicians defecting from parties, making false promises and tall What is Politics. claims, manipulating different sections, pursuing personal or group interests ruthlessly and in worst cases stooping to crime, they link politics with  scams. So prevalent is this way of thinking that when we see people in different walks of life trying to promote their interests by any means possible, we say they are playing politics.   If we see a cricketer manipulating to stay in the team, or a fellow student trying to use his father s position, or a colleague in office mindlessly agreeing with the boss, we say he or she is playing  dirty  politics. Disillusioned by such pursuits of selfishness we despair of politics. We say,  I am not interested in politics  or  I am going to stay away from politics. It is not only ordinary people who despair of politics; even businessmen and entrepreneurs routinely blame politics for their woes even as they benefit from and fund various political parties. Cinema stars also complain of politics though they seem to be adept at the game once they join it. We are thus confronted with conflicting images of politics. Is politics an undesirable activity that we should stay away from and get rid off? Or, is it a worthwhile activity which we must engage with in order to make a better world? It is unfortunate that politics has come to be associated with the pursuit of self-interest by any and every method. We need to realise that politics is an important and integral part of any society. Mahatma Gandhi once observed that politics envelops us like the coils of a snake and there is no other way out but to wrestle with it. No society can exist without some form of political organisation and collective decision making. A society that wants to sustain itself needs to take into account the multiple needs and interests of its members. A number of social institutions such as the family, tribes and economic institutions, have emerged to help people fulfil their needs and aspirations. Such institutions help us find ways of living together acknowledging our obligations to each other. Among such institutions, governments play an important part. How governments You must retire from politics at once! Your activities are having a bad influence on him. He thinks he can get away with lying and R. K. Laxman in the Times of India are formed and how they function is thus an important focus of politics. But politics is not confined to the affairs of government. In fact what governments do is relevant because it affects the lives of the people in many different ways. We see that governments determine our economic policy and foreign policy and educational policy. These policies can help to improve the lives of people but an inefficient or corrupt government can also endanger people s lives and security. If the government in power allows any conflicts to become violent, markets close down and schools are shut. These disrupt our lives; we cannot buy things that we may need urgently; those who are sick cannot reach the hospital; even the school schedule gets affected, syllabi cannot be completed and we may have to take extra coaching for the exams and pay tuition fees. If, on the other hand, the government makes policies to increase literacy and employment, we may get an opportunity to go to a good school and get a decent job. Since the actions of the government affect us deeply, we take a lively interest in what governments do. We form associations and organise campaigns to articulate our demands. We negotiate with others and try to shape the goals that governments pursue.  When we disagree with the policies of the government, we protest and organise demonstrations to persuade the government to change the existing laws. We passionately debate the actions of our representatives and discuss whether corruption has increased or decreased. We ask whether corruption can be rooted out; whether reservations for specific groups are just or not. We try to understand why some parties and leaders win elections. In this way we look for the rationale underlying the prevalent chaos and decay, and aspire to create a better To sum up, politics arises from the fact that we have different visions of what is just and desirable for us and our influence our daily life? Analyse a day s events in your life. LET S DO IT D Read the newspaper. What are the issues dominating the headlines? Do you think they have any relevance for you? society. It involves the multiple negotiations that go on in society through which collective decisions are made. At one level, it involves what governments do and how they relate to the aspirations of the people; at another level, it involves how people struggle and influence decision making. People may be said to engage in political activity whenever they negotiate with each other and take part in collective activities which are designed to promote social development and help to resolve common problems. 1.2 WHAT DO WE STUDY IN POLITICAL THEORY? If we look around us what we see would be movement, development and change. But if we look deeper we would also see certain values and principles that have inspired people and guided policies. Ideals like democracy, freedom or equality for instance. Different countries may try to protect such values by enshrining them in their constitutions as is the case with the American and Indian constitutions. These documents did not just emerge overnight; they are built upon the ideas and principles debated almost since the time of Kautilya, Aristotle to Jean Jacques Rousseau, Karl Marx, Mahatma Gandhi and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. As far back as the fifth century B.C., Plato and Aristotle discussed with their students whether monarchy or democracy was better. In modern times, Rousseau first argued for freedom as a fundamental right of humankind. Karl Marx argued that equality was as crucial as freedom. Closer home, Mahatma Gandhi discussed the meaning of genuine freedom or swaraj in his book Hind Swaraj. Dr. Ambedkar vigorously argued that the scheduled castes must be considered a minority, and as such, must receive special protection. These ideas find their place in the Indian Constitution; our Preamble enshrines freedom and equality; the chapter on Rights in the Indian Constitution abolishes untouchability in any form; Gandhian principles find a place in participate in politics?. Write a short note on any of mentioned in the chapter. [50 Political theory deals with the ideas and principles that shape Constitutions, governments and social life in a systematic manner. It clarifies the meaning of concepts such as freedom, equality, justice, democracy, secularism and so on. It probes the significance of principles such as rule of law, separation of powers, judicial review, etc. This is done by examining the arguments advanced by different thinkers in defence of these concepts. Though Rousseau or Marx or Gandhi did not become politicians, their ideas influenced generations of politicians everywhere. There are also contemporary thinkers who draw upon them to defend freedom or democracy in our own time. Besides examining arguments, political theorists also reflect upon our current political experiences and point out trends and possibilities for the future. But is all this relevant for us now? Have we not already achieved freedom and democracy?  While India is free and independent, questions regarding freedom and equality have not ceased to crop up. This is because issues concerning freedom, equality, democracy, arise in many areas of social life and they are being implemented in different sectors at different paces. For instance, although equality may exist in the political sphere in the form of equal rights, it may not exist to the same extent in the economic or social spheres. People may enjoy equal political rights but still be discriminated Can you identify the political principle/value which is in application in each of the following statements/situations? I should be able to decide which subjects I want to study in The practice of untouchability has been abolished. All Indians are equal before law. Minorities can have their own schools and colleges. Foreigners who are visiting India cannot vote in Indian There should be no censorship of media or films. Students should be consulted while planning the annual day Everyone must join the Republic Day celebrations. against socially because of their caste or poverty. Some people may have a privileged place in society while others are deprived even of basic necessities. Some are able to achieve whatever goals they set for themselves while many are unable even to go to schools so that they can have decent jobs in the future. For them, freedom is still a Secondly, though freedom is guaranteed in our Constitution, we encounter new interpretations all the time. This is a bit like playing a game; as we play chess or cricket, we learn how to interpret the rules. In the process, we discover new and broader meanings of the game itself. Similarly, the fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution are continually being reinterpreted in response to new circumstances. For instance, the right to life has been interpreted by the Courts to include the right to livelihood. The right to information has been granted through a new law. Societies frequently encounter new challenges which generate new interpretations. The fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution have been amended and expanded over time through judicial interpretations and government policies which are designed to address new problems. Thirdly, as our world changes, we may discover new dimensions of freedom as well as new threats to freedom. For instance, global communications technology is making it easier for activists to network with one another across the world for protecting tribal cultures or forests. But it also enables terrorists and criminals to network. Moreover, internet commerce is all set to increase in the future. This means that the information we give about ourselves online to buy goods or services must be protected. So even though netizens (citizens of the internet) do not like government control, they recognise that some form of regulation is necessary to safeguard individual security and privacy. As a result, questions are raised regarding how much freedom should be given to people using the net. For instance, should they be allowed to send unsolicited e-mails to strangers? Can you advertise your products in LET S DO IT D magazines. What are the various issues concept do they chat rooms? Should governments be allowed to read private e-mails to track down terrorists? How much regulation is justified and who should regulate   governments or some private regulators? Political theory has a lot to teach us about possible answers to these questions and is therefore very relevant. 1.3 PUTTING POLITICAL THEORY TO PRACTICE In this textbook, we confine ourselves to one aspect of political theory   that which deals with the origins, meaning and significance of political ideas that we are familiar with such as freedom, equality, citizenship, justice, development, nationalism, secularism and so on. When we begin a debate or argument on any topic, we usually ask  what does it mean?  and  how does it matter?  Political theorists have asked what is freedom or equality and provided diverse definitions. Unlike in mathematics where there can be one definition of a triangle or square, we encounter many definitions of equality or freedom or justice. In ancient Greece, in the city of Athens, Socrates was described as the  wisest man. He was known for questioning and challenging popularly held beliefs about society, religion and politics. For this he was condemned to death by the rulers of His student Plato wrote extensively about the life and ideas of Socrates. In his book  The Republic, he created the character Socrates and through him examined the question   what is justice? The book opens with a dialogue between Socrates and Cephalus. In the course of this dialogue Cephalus and his friends come to recognise that their understanding of justice is inadequate and unacceptable. The important thing in this is that Socrates uses reason to reveal the limitations and inconsistencies in a given point of view. His adversaries eventually admit that the views they had held and lived by could not be sustained. This is because terms like equality concern our relationships with other human beings rather than with things. Human beings, unlike things, have opinions on issues like equality. And many opinions need to be understood and harmonised. How do we go about doing this? Let us begin with our common experience of equality in different places. You may have noticed that people often jump the queue in shops or doctor s waiting rooms or government offices. Sometimes, those who do so are told to get back in line and we feel glad. Sometimes, they get ahead and we feel cheated. We resent this because we all want equal opportunity to get goods and services for which we are paying. So when we reflect on our experience, we understand that equality means equal opportunity for all. At the same time, if there are separate counters for the old and disabled, we understand that such special treatment may be justified. But we also notice everyday that many poor people cannot go to the shop or to a doctor because they have no money to pay Read and see how Socrates achieved this. Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what is it?  to speak the truth and to pay your debts  no more than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friend when in his right mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him?   You are quite right, he replied. But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is not a correct definition of justice.   And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. for goods and services. Some of these people could be day labourers who are cutting stones or lugging bricks for long hours. If we are sensitive, we feel that it is not fair that in a society some members cannot even have their basic needs satisfied.  We come to realise that equality must involve some kind of fairness so that people are not unduly exploited and disadvantaged by Consider the fact that there are many children who cannot go to school because they have to work to feed themselves. And most girl students in poor households are pulled out of school to care for their younger siblings while parents go to work. Even though the Indian constitution guarantees the right to primary education for all, this right remains formal. Again, we may feel that the government should do more for such children and their parents so that they are enabled to go to school. Thus you may see that our idea of equality is quite complex; when we are in a queue or playground we want equal opportunity. But ought the just to injure anyone at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? Yes, of horses. And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue And that human virtue is justice? To be sure. If we suffer from some disability we want special provisions made. When we cannot even afford basic needs, equal opportunity is not enough. We must be enabled to go to school or get help through proactive measures such as fair distribution of resources (jobs, decent wages, subsidised hospitals, etc.). This requires that some agency be made responsible to ensure fairness. So the reason we have many definitions is because the meaning of equality is dependent on the context. We started with what it meant for ourselves and then proceeded to consider others (the poor, disadvantaged, senior citizens, etc.). We discovered many layers of meaning. We have been doing political theory without realising it. Political theorists clarify the meaning of political concepts by looking at how they are understood and used in ordinary language. They also debate and examine the diverse meanings and opinions in a systematic manner. When is equality of opportunity enough? When do people need special treatment? How far and how long should such special treatment be given? Should poor children be Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust? That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good by virtue make them bad? Nor can the good harm anyone? And the just is the good? given midday meals to encourage them to stay in schools? These are some questions which they address. As you can see, these issues are eminently practical; they provide guidelines for framing public policies on education and employment. As in the case of equality, so also in the case of other concepts, political theorists engage with everyday opinions, debate possible meanings and thrash out policy options. Freedom, Citizenship, Rights, Development, Justice, Equality, Nationalism and Secularism are some of the concepts that we will discuss in the following chapters. WHY SHOULD WE STUDY POLITICAL THEORY? We may have political ideas but do we need to study political theory? Is it not more suited for politicians who practise politics? Or for bureaucrats who make policies? Or for those who teach political theory? Or for lawyers and judges who interpret the Constitution and laws? Or for activists and journalists who expose exploitation Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from a disease is best able to And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a march upon the Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief? That, I suppose, is to be inferred. Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good at stealing it. That is implied in the argument. and demand new rights? What do we (high school students) gain by knowing the meaning of freedom or equality? First of all, political theory is relevant for all the above target groups. As high school students, we may choose one of the above professions in the future and so indirectly it is relevant for us even now. Do we not learn mathematics although not all of us will become mathematicians or engineers? Is it not because basic arithmetic is useful to life in general? Secondly, we are all going to be citizens entitled to vote and decide other issues. To act responsibly, it is helpful to have a basic knowledge of the political ideas and institutions that shape the world we live in. In the information society, it is crucial that we learn to be reasonable and informed if we are to participate in gram sabhas or offer our views on websites and polls. If we simply express arbitrary preferences, we will not be very effective. But if we are thoughtful and mature we can use the new media to discuss and express our common interests. Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief.   You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad our enemies? And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is just to do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good and harm to our enemies when they are evil? Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. But ought the just to injure any one at all? Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and his enemies. When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated? Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, not of dogs? Yes, of horses. And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not of horses? As citizens, we are a bit like the audience in a music concert; we are not the main performers interpreting the song and melody. But we set the agenda and appreciate the output and put in new requests. Have you noticed that musicians perform better when they know the audience is knowledgeable and appreciative? So also an educated and vigilant citizenry makes those who play politics Thirdly, freedom, equality and secularism are not abstract issues in our lives. We daily encounter discrimination of various sorts in families, schools, colleges, shopping malls and so on. We ourselves have prejudices against people who are different from us, be they of a different caste or religion or gender or class. If we feel oppressed, we want it redressed and if that is delayed, we feel violent revolution is justified. If we are privileged, we deny that there is any oppression even as our maids and servants struggle for dignity. Sometimes, we even feel that our servants deserve the treatment they get. What political theory encourages us to do is examine our ideas and feelings And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which is the proper virtue of man? And that human virtue is justice? To be sure. Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust? That is the result. But can the musician by his art make men unmusical? Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen? And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general can the good by virtue make them bad? about political things. Just by looking at them more carefully, we become moderate in our ideas and feelings. Finally, as students we enjoy debates and elocution competitions. We have opinions about what is right or wrong, just or unjust but do not know whether they are reasonable or not. Only when we argue with others, we realise the need to defend them and seek out reasons and arguments. Political theory exposes us to systematic thinking on justice or equality so that we can polish our opinions and argue in an informed manner and for the sake of common interests. Such skills of debating rationally and communicating effectively are likely to be great assets in the global informational order. Nor can the good harm any one? And the just is the good? Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust? I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of debts, and that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends, and evil the debt which he owes to his enemies,  to say this is not wise; for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown, the injuring of another can be in no case just. I agree with you, said Polemarchus. Which of the following statements are true/false about Political Theory? (a) It discusses ideas that form the basis of political institutions. (b) It explains the relationship between different religions. (c) It explains the meanings of concepts like equality and freedom. (d) It predicts the performance of political parties. Politics is more than what politicians do. Do you agree with this statement? Give examples. Vigilant citizens are a must for the successful working of a democracy. In what ways is the study of political theory useful for us? Identify four ways in which political theory can be useful to us? Do you think that a good/convincing argument can compel others to listen to you? Do you think studying political theory is like studying mathematics? Give reasons for your answer. Human history provides many examples of people and communities which have been dominated, or enslaved, or exploited, by more powerful groups. But it also provides us with inspiring examples of heroic struggles against such domination. What is this freedom for which people have been willing to sacrifice and die? In its essence, the struggle for freedom represents the desire of people to be in control of their own lives and destinies and to have the opportunity to express themselves freely through their choices and activities. Not just individuals but societies also value their independence and wish to protect their culture and future. However, given the diverse interests and ambitions of people any form of social living requires some rules and regulation. These rules may require some constraints to be imposed on the freedom of individuals but it is recognised that such constraints may also free us from insecurity and provide us with the conditions in which we can develop ourselves. In political theory much of the discussion regarding freedom has therefore focused on trying to evolve principles by which we can distinguish between socially necessary constraints and other restrictions. There has also been debate about possible limitations on freedom which may result from the social and economic structures of a society. In this chapter we will look at some of these debates. After studying this chapter you should be able to: Understand the importance of freedom for individuals and societies. Explain the difference between the negative and positive dimensions of freedom. Explain what is meant by the term  harm principle. 2.1 THE IDEAL OF FREEDOM Before we set out to answer these questions, let us stop for a moment and consider this. The autobiography of one of the greatest persons of the twentieth century, Nelson Mandela, is titled Long Walk to Freedom. In this book he talks about his personal struggle against the apartheid regime in South Africa, about the resistance of his people to the segregationist policies of the white regime, about the humiliations, hardships and police brutalities suffered by the black people of South Africa. These ranged from being bundled into townships and being denied easy movement about, to being denied a free choice of whom to marry, such measures constituted a body of constraints imposed by the apartheid regime that discriminated between citizens based on their race. For Mandela and his colleagues it was the struggle against such unjust constraints, the struggle to remove the obstacles to the freedom of all the people of South Africa (not just the black or the coloured but also the white people), that was the Long Walk to Freedom. For this freedom, Mandela spent twenty-seven years of his life in jail, often in solitary what it meant to give up s youth for an ideal, to voluntarily give up the pleasure of talking with s friends, of playing one s favourite game (Mandela loved boxing), of wearing one  favourite clothes, of listening to one  favourite music, of enjoying the many festivals that are part of one  s life. Imagine giving all these up and choosing instead to be locked up alone in a room, not knowing when one would be released, only because one campaigned for the freedom s people.  For freedom Mandela paid Do only great men and women fight for great principles like freedom? What does this principle mean to me? Now, take another case. Gandhiji s thoughts on non-violence have been a source of inspiration for Aung San Suu Kyi as she remained under house arrest in Myanmar, separated from her children, unable to visit her husband when he was dying of cancer, because she feared that if she left Myanmar to visit him in England she would not be able to return. Aung San Suu Kyi saw her freedom as connected to the freedom of her people. Her book of essays bears the title Freedom from Fear. She says,  for me real freedom is freedom from fear and unless you can live free from fear you cannot live a dignified human life. These are deep thoughts that lead us to pause and consider their implications. We must not, her words suggest, be afraid of the opinions of other people, or of the attitude of authority, or of the reactions of the members of our community to the things we want to do, of the ridicule of our peers, or of speaking our mind. Yet we find that we often exhibit such fear. For Aung San Suu Kyi living a  dignified human life  requires us to be able to overcome such fear. From these two books of Nelson Mandela and Aung San Suu Kyi, we can see the power of the ideal of freedom, an ideal that was at the centre of our national struggle and the struggles of the peoples of Asia and Africa against British, French and Portuguese 2.2 WHAT IS FREEDOM? A simple answer to the question  what is freedom  is absence of constraints. Freedom is said to exist when external constraints on the individual are absent. In terms of this definition an individual could be considered free if he/she is not subject to external controls or coercion and is able to make independent decisions and act in an autonomous way. However, absence of constraints is only one dimension of freedom. Freedom is also about expanding the ability Can you think of someone in your village, town or district who has struggled for his/her own freedom or the freedom of others? Write a short note about that person and the particular aspect of freedom which he/she struggled to protect. LET S DO IT D of people to freely express themselves and develop their potential. Freedom in this sense is the condition in which people can develop their creativity Both these aspects of freedom   the absence of external constraints as well as the existence of conditions in which people can develop their talents   are important. A free society would be one which enables all its members to develop their potential with the minimum of social constraints. No individual living in society can hope to enjoy total absence of any kind of constraints or restrictions. It becomes necessary then to determine which social constraints are justified and which are not, which are acceptable and which should be removed. To understand which social discussions on freedom need to look at the core relationship between the individual and the society (or group, community, or state) within which she/he is placed. That is, we need to examine the relationship between individual and society. We would need to see which features of the society allow the individual the freedom to choose, decide or act, and which do not. We would need to determine which features are desirable and which are not, which should be removed and which should not. Further we need to see if the A concept analogous to Freedom in Indian political thought is  Swaraj. The term Swaraj incorporates within it two words   Swa (Self) and Raj (Rule). It can be understood to mean both the rule of the self and rule over self. Swaraj, in the context of the freedom struggle in India referred to freedom as a constitutional and political demand, and as a value at the social-collective level. That is why Swaraj was such an important rallying cry in the freedom movement inspiring Tilak s famous statement    Swaraj is my birth right and I shall It is the understanding of Swaraj as Rule over the Self that was highlighted by Mahatma Gandhi in his work Hind Swaraj where he states,  It is Swaraj when we learn to rule ourselves. Swaraj is not just freedom but liberation in redeeming one s self-respect, self-responsibility, and capacities for self-realisation from institutions of dehumanisation. Understanding the real  Self, and its relation to communities and society, is critical to the project of attaining Gandhiji believed the development that follows would liberate both individual and collective potentialities guided by the principle of justice. Needless to say, such an under- standing is as relevant to the twenty first century as it was when Gandhiji wrote the Hind Swaraj in 1909. principles which we use to differentiate necessary from unnecessary constraints also apply to the relationships between individuals and groups and nations. Thus far we have defined freedom as the absence of constraint. To be free means to reduce or minimise social constraints that limit our ability to make choices freely. However, this is only one aspect of freedom. To put it in another way, freedom also has a positive dimension. To be free a society must widen the area in which individuals, groups, communities or nations, will be able to charter their own destiny and be what they wish to be. Freedom, in this sense, allows the full development of the individual s creativity, sensibilities and capabilities: be it in sports, science, art, music or exploration. A free society is one that enables one to pursue one s interests with a minimum of constraints. Freedom is considered valuable because it allows us to make choices and to exercise our judgement. It permits the exercise of the individual s powers of reason and judgement. The Sources of Constraints Restrictions on the freedom of individuals may come from domination and external controls. Such restrictions may be imposed by force or they may be imposed by a government through laws which embody the power of the rulers over the people and which may have the backing of force. This was the form of constraint represented by colonial rulers over their subjects, or by the system of apartheid in South Africa.  Some form of government may be inevitable but if the government is a democratic one, the members of a state could retain some control over their rulers. That is why democratic government is considered to be an important means of protecting the freedom of people. But constraints on freedom can also result from social inequality of the kind implicit in the caste system, or which result from extreme economic inequality in a society. The quotation from Subhas Chandra Bose on freedom draws attention to the need for the country to work to remove such constraints. Girls and boys should be free to decide whom they wish to marry. Parents should have no say in this matter.  2.3 WHY DO WE NEED CONSTRAINTS? We cannot live in a world where there are no constraints. We need some constraints or else society would descend into chaos. Differences may exist between people regarding their ideas and opinions, they may have conflicting ambitions, they may compete to control scarce resources. There are numerous reasons why disagreements may develop in a society which may express themselves through open conflict. We see people around us ready to fight for all kinds of reasons ranging from the serious to the trivial. Rage while driving on the roads, fighting over parking spaces, quarrels over housing or land, disagreements regarding whether a particular film should be screened, all these, and many other issues, can lead to conflict and violence, perhaps even loss of life. Therefore every society needs some mechanisms to control violence and settle disputes. So long as we are able to respect each other s views and do not attempt to impose our views on others we may be able to live freely and with minimum constraints. Ideally, in a free society we should be able to hold our views, develop our own rules of living, and pursue our choices. But the creation of such a society too requires some constraints. At the very least, it requires that we be willing to respect differences of views, opinions and beliefs. However, sometimes, we think that a NETAJI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE ON FREEDOM  If we are to bring about a revolution of ideas we have first to hold up before us an ideal which will galvanise our whole life. That ideal is freedom. But freedom is a word which has varied connotations and, even in our country, the conception of freedom has undergone a process of evolution. By freedom I mean all round freedom, i.e., freedom for the individual as well as for society; freedom for the rich as well as for the poor; freedom for men as well as for women; freedom for all individuals and for all classes. This freedom implies not only emancipation from political bondage but also equal distribution of wealth, abolition of caste barriers and social iniquities and destruction of communalism and religious intolerance. This is an ideal which may appear Utopian to hard-headed men and women, but this ideal alone can appease the hunger in the soul.  (Presidential Address to the Student s Conference held at Lahore on 19 October 1929) strong commitment to our beliefs requires that we must oppose all those who differ from or reject our views. We see their views or ways of living as unacceptable or even undesirable. Under such circumstances we need some legal and political restraints to ensure that differences may be discussed and debated without one group coercively imposing its views on the other. Worse still, we may be confronted with attempts to bully or harass us so that we conform to their wishes. If so, we may want stronger support from law to ensure that my freedom is protected. The important question however is to identify which constraints on freedom are necessary and justifiable and which are not? What sort of authority, external to the individual, may justifiably say what can be done and what cannot? Further, are there any areas of our life and action that should be left free of all external constraints? 2.4 HARM PRINCIPLE To answer these questions satisfactorily we have to address the issue of the limits, competence, and consequences of the imposition. We also have to engage with another issue that John Stuart Mill stated so eloquently in his essay On Liberty. In the discussions in When we say that someone s parents are very  liberal, we usually mean that they are very tolerant. As a political ideology, liberalism has been identified with tolerance as a value. Liberals have often defended the right of a person to hold and express his/her opinions and beliefs even when they disagree with them. But that is not all that there is to liberalism. And liberalism is not the only modern ideology that supports What is more distinctive about modern liberalism is its focus on the individual. For liberals entities like family, society, community have no value in themselves, but only if these are valued by individuals. They would say, for example, that the decision to marry someone should be taken by the individual rather than by the family, caste or the community. Liberals tend to give priority to individual liberty over values like equality. They also tend to be suspicious of political authority. Historically, liberalism favoured free market and minimal role to the state. However, present day liberalism acknowledges a role for welfare state and accepts the need for measures to reduce both social and economic inequalities. political theory it is called the  harm principle. Let us quote his statement and then try to explain it....the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. Mill introduces here an important distinction. He distinguishes between  self-regarding  actions, i.e., those actions that have consequences only for the individual actor and nobody else, and  other regarding  actions, i.e., those actions that also have consequences for others. He argues that with respect to actions or choices that affect only one s self, self-regarding actions, the state (or any other external authority) has no business to interfere. Or put in simple language it would be:  That s my business, I ll do what I like, or  How does it concern you, if it does not affect you?  In contrast, with respect to actions that have consequences for others, actions which may cause harm to them, there is some case for external interference. After all if your actions cause me harm then surely I must be saved from such harm by some external authority? In this case it is the state which can constrain a person from acting in a way that causes harm to someone else. However, as freedom is at the core of human society, is so crucial for a dignified human life, it should only be constrained in special circumstances. The  harm caused  must be  serious. For minor harm, Mill recommends only social disapproval and not the force of law. For example the playing of loud music in an apartment building should bring only social disapproval from the other residents of the building. They should not involve the police. They should indicate their disapproval, of the inconvenience that playing loud music has caused them, by perhaps refusing to greet the person who plays the music disregarding the harm it is causing others. The harm that playing loud music causes is that of preventing those in other apartments from talking, or sleeping, or listening to their own music. Why does he talk This is minor harm and should only provoke social disapproval. It is not a fit case for legal punishment. Constraining actions by the force of law should only happen when the other regarding actions cause serious harm to definite individuals. Otherwise society must bear the inconvenience in the spirit of protecting freedom. People should be ready to tolerate different ways of life, different points of view, and the different interests, so long as they do not cause harm to others. But such tolerance need not be extended to views and actions which may put people in danger or foment hatred The Issue of Dress Code If choosing what to wear is an expression of one s freedom then how should we look at the following situations where there are restrictions on dress? In China during Mao s regime all the people had to wear  Mao suits  based on the argument that it was an expression of equality. A fatwa was issued against Sania Mirza for her style of dress that was considered, by one cleric, to be against the dress code prescribed for The rules of a test match in cricket require every cricketer to wear Students are required to wear school uniforms. Let us debate some questions. Is the restriction on what to wear justified in all cases or only in some? When does it constitute a constraint on freedom? Who has the authority to impose these constraints? Should religious leaders be given the authority to issue decrees on dress? Can the state decide what one should wear? Should the ICC set down rules of what to wear when playing cricket? Is the imposition excessive? Does it diminish the many ways, people have of expressing themselves? What are the consequences of accepting the impositions? Will the society become  equal  if everyone dresses the same way as in Maoist China? Or are women being denied the participation in sports if they cannot wear clothes that would help them to compete effectively? Will the game be affected if cricketers wear coloured clothes? against them. Hate campaigns cause serious harm to the freedom of others and actions that cause  serious harm  are actions on which constraints can be imposed. But we must make sure that the constraints imposed are not so severe that they destroy freedom itself. For example, we must not ask for life imprisonment for those who only conduct hate campaign. Maybe some restriction on their movement, or some curtailment of their right to hold public meetings can be considered especially if they continue to carry on this campaign in spite of warnings by the state to desist from conducting In the constitutional discussions in India, the term used for such justifiable constraints is  reasonable restrictions. The restrictions may be there but they must be reasonable, i.e., capable of being defended by reason, not excessive, not out of proportion to the action being restricted, since then it would impinge on the general condition of freedom in society. We must not develop a habit of imposing restrictions since such a habit is detrimental to freedom. 2.5 NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE LIBERTY Earlier in the chapter we had mentioned two dimensions of freedom school  freedom as the absence of external constraints, and freedom as the expansion of opportunities to express one s self. In political theory these have been called negative and positive liberty.  Negative liberty  seeks to define and defend an area in which the individual would be inviolable, in which he or she could  do, be or become  whatever he or she wished to  do, be or become. This is an area in which no external authority can interfere. It is a minimum area that is sacred and in which whatever the individual does, is not to be interfered with. The existence of the  minimum area of non- interference  is the recognition that human nature and human dignity need an area where the person can act unobstructed by others. How big should this area be, or what should it contain, are matters of discussion, and will continue to be matters of debate since the bigger the area of non-interference the more the freedom. All we need to recognise is that the negative liberty tradition argues for an inviolable area of non-interference in which the individual can express himself or herself. If the area is too small then human dignity gets compromised. We may here ask the obvious question: Is the choice of what clothes to wear in different situations   school, playing-field, office   a choice that belongs to the minimum area and therefore one that cannot be interfered with by external authority or is it a choice that can be interfered with by state, religious authority, ICC or CBSE. Negative liberty arguments are in response to the question:  Over what area am I the master?  It is concerned with explaining the idea of  freedom from. In contrast, the arguments of positive liberty are concerned with explaining the idea of  freedom to. They are in response to the answer  who governs me?  to which the ideal answer is  I govern myself. Positive liberty discussions have a long tradition that can be traced to Rousseau, Hegel, Marx, Gandhi, Aurobindo, and also to those who draw their inspiration from these thinkers. It is concerned with looking at the conditions and nature of the relationship between the individual and society and of improving these conditions such that there are fewer constraints to the development of the individual personality. The individual is like a flower that blossoms when the soil is fertile, and the sun is gentle, and the water is adequate, and the care is regular. The individual to develop his or her capability must get the benefit of enabling positive conditions in material, political and social domains. That is, the person must not be constrained by poverty or unemployment; they must have adequate material resources to pursue their wants and needs. They must also have the opportunity to participate in the decision making process so that the laws made reflect their choices, or at least take those preferences into account. Above all, to develop their mind and intellect, individuals must have access to education and other associated opportunities necessary to lead a reasonably good life. Positive liberty recognises that one can be free only in society (not outside it) and hence tries to make that society such that it enables the development of the individual whereas negative liberty is only concerned with the inviolable area of non-interference and not with the conditions in society, outside this area, as such. Of course negative liberty would like to expand this minimum area as Do we have the freedom to destroy much as is possible keeping in mind, however, the stability of society. Generally they both go together and support each other, but it can happen that tyrants justify their rule by invoking arguments of Freedom of Expression One of the issues that is considered to belong to the minimum area of  non-interference  is the freedom of expression. J.S.Mill set out good reasons why freedom of expression should not be restricted. This is a good case for discussion. At various times there have been demands to ban books, plays, films, or academic articles in research journals. Let us think about this demand to ban books in the light of our discussion so far which sees freedom as  the making of choices, where a distinction is made between  negative and positive liberty, where we recognise the need for  justifiable constraints  but these have to be supported by proper procedures and important moral arguments. Freedom of expression is a fundamental value and for that society must be willing to bear some inconvenience to protect it from people who want to restrict it. Remember Voltaire s statement    I disapprove of what you say but I will defend to death your right to say it. How deeply are we committed to this freedom of expression? Some years ago Deepa Mehta, film maker, wanted to make a film about widows in Varanasi. It sought to explore the plight of widows but there was a strong protest from a section of the polity who felt that it would show India in a very bad light, who felt it was being made to cater to foreign audiences, who felt it would bring a bad name to the ancient town. They refused to allow it to be made and as a result it could not be made in Varanasi. It was subsequently made elsewhere. Similarly the book Ramayana Retold by Aubrey Menon and The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie were banned after protest from some sections of society. The film The Last Temptation of Christ and the play Me Nathuram Boltey were also banned after protests. Banning is an easy solution for the short term since it meets the immediate demand but is very harmful for the long-term prospects of freedom in a society because once one begins to ban then one develops a habit of banning. But does this mean that we should never ban? After all we do have censorship of films. Is it not similar to banning, where only a portion of a film is banned and not the whole film? The question that is often debated, therefore, is: When should one ban and when should one not? Should one never ban? Just for interest, in England anyone who is employed to work for the Royal household is constrained by contract (a constraint?) from writing about the inner affairs of the household. So if such a person were to leave the employment they would be unable to give an interview or write an article or author a book about the politics of the Royal household. Is this an unjustifiable constraint on the freedom of expression? Constraints of different kind thus exist and we are subject to them in different situations. While reflecting on such situations we need to realise that when constraints are backed by organised social   religious or cultural   authority or by the might of the state, they  restrict our freedom  in ways that are difficult to fight against. However, if we willingly, or for the sake of pursuing our goals or ambitions, accept certain restrictions, our freedom is not similarly limited. In any case if we are not coerced into accepting the conditions, then we cannot claim that our freedom has been curtailed. FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION John Stuart Mill, a political thinker and an activist in the nineteenth century Britain, offered a passionate defence of freedom of expression, including freedom of thought and discussion. In his book On Liberty he offered four reasons why there should be freedom of expression even for those who espouse ideas that appear  false  or misleading today. First, no idea is completely false. What appears to us as false has an element of truth. If we ban  false  ideas, we would lose that element of truth that they contain. This is related to the second point. Truth does not emerge by itself. It is only through a conflict of opposing views that truth emerges. Ideas that seem wrong today may have been very valuable in the emergence of what we consider right kind Thirdly, this conflict of ideas is valuable not just in the past but is of continuing value for all times. Truth always runs the risk of being reduced to an unthinking clich. It is only when we expose it to opposing views that we can be sure that this idea is trustworthy. Finally, we cannot be sure that what we consider true is actually true. Very often ideas that were considered false at one point by the entire society and, therefore, suppressed turned out to be true later on. A society that completely suppresses all ideas that are not acceptable today, runs the danger of losing the benefits of what might turn out to be very valuable knowledge. We began by saying that freedom is the absence of external constraints. We have now come to realise that freedom embodies our capacity and our ability to make choices. And when we make choices, we have also to accept responsibility for our actions and their consequences. It is for this reason that most advocates of liberty and freedom maintain that children must be placed in the care of parents. Our capacity to make the right choices, to assess in a reasoned manner available options, and shoulder the responsibility of our actions, have to be built through education and cultivation of judgement just as much as it needs to be nurtured by limiting the authority of the state and the society. What is meant by freedom? Is there a relationship between freedom for the individual and freedom for the nation? What is the difference between the negative and positive conception of What is meant by social constraints? Are constraints of any kind necessary for enjoying freedom? What is the role of the state in upholding freedom of its citizens? What is meant by freedom of expression? What in your view would be a reasonable restriction on this freedom? Give examples. Credit: Images on opening page: http://www.africawithin.com (Nelson Mandela) and http://www.ibiblio.org (Suu Kyi) This chapter is about the concept of equality, a  value that is also enshrined in our Constitution. In reflecting on this concept it  examines the following questions: What is equality? Why should we be concerned about this moral and political Does the pursuit of equality involve treating everyone the same way in every How may we pursue equality and minimise inequality  in different spheres of life? How do we distinguish between different dimensions of equality   political, economic In the course of understanding and answering these questions, you would encounter some important  ideologies of our time   socialism, marxism, liberalism and feminism. In this chapter you will see facts and figures about the conditions of inequality. These are only for you to appreciate the nature of inequality; the facts and figures need not be memorised. WHY DOES EQUALITY MATTER? Equality is a powerful moral and political ideal that has inspired and guided human society for many centuries. It is implicit in all faiths and religions which proclaim all human beings to be the creation of God. As a political ideal the concept of equality invokes the idea that all human beings have an equal worth regardless of their colour, gender, race, or nationality. It maintains that human beings deserve equal consideration and respect because of their common humanity. It is this notion of a shared humanity that lies behind, for instance, the notions of universal human rights or  crimes In the modern period the equality of all human beings has been used as a rallying slogan in the struggles against states and social institutions which uphold inequalities of rank, wealth status or privilege, among people. In the eighteenth century, the French revolutionaries used the slogan  Liberty, Equality and Fraternity  to revolt against the landed feudal aristocracy and the monarchy. The demand for equality was also raised during anti-colonial liberation struggles in Asia and Africa during the twentieth century. It continues to be raised by struggling groups such as Everyone I know believes in a religion. Every religion I know preaches equality. Then why is there inequality in the Search for quotations from different religious scriptures that affirm the ideal of equality. Read these in the LET S DO IT D women or dalits who feel marginalised in our society. Today, equality is a widely accepted ideal which is embodied in the constitutions and laws of many countries. Yet, it is inequality rather than equality which is most visible around us in the world as well as within our own society. In our country we can see slums existing side by side with luxury housing, schools with world class facilities and airconditioned classrooms along with schools which may lack even drinking water facilities or toilets, waste of food as well as starvation. There are glaring differences between what the law promises and what we see around us. Read the accompanying fact sheet on global inequalities and the table on inequalities within our country. FACT SHEET ON GLOBAL INEQUALITIES The richest 50 individuals in the world have a combined income greater than that of the poorest 40 crore people. The poorest 40 per cent of the world s population receive only 5 per cent of global income, while the richest 10 per cent of the world s population controls 54 per cent of global income. The first world of the advanced industrial countries, mainly North America and Western Europe, with 25 per cent of the world s population, owns 86 per cent of the world s industry, and consumes 80 per cent of the world s On a per capita basis, a resident of the advanced industrial countries consumes at least three times as much water, ten times as much energy, thirteen times as much iron and steel and fourteen times as much paper as someone living in a developing country like India or China. The risk of dying from pregnancy related causes is 1 to 18 in Nigeria but 1 to 8700 in Canada. The industrial countries of the first world account for nearly two-thirds of the global emissions of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels. They also account for three-quarters of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxide that cause acid rain. Many industries known for their high rate of pollution are being shifted from the developed countries to the less developed Source: Human Development Report, 2005, UNDP. ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES IN INDIA Here are some findings from the Census of India held in 2011 about household amenities and assets. You don t need to memorise any of these figures. Just read these to understand the extent of urban-rural disparities in the country. Where would your own family fit? Families that have    or   Tap water in the house Bathroom in the house Thus we face a paradox: almost everyone accepts the ideal of equality, yet almost everywhere we encounter inequality. We live in a complex world of unequal wealth, opportunities, work situations, and power. Should we be concerned about these kinds of inequalities? Are they a permanent and inevitable feature of social life which reflects the differences of talent and ability of human beings as well as their different contributions towards social progress and prosperity? Or are these inequalities a consequence of our social position and rules? These are questions that have troubled people all over the world for many years. It is a question of this kind that makes equality one of the central  themes of social and political theory. A student of political theory has to address a range of questions, such as, what does equality imply? Since we are different in many obvious ways, what does it mean to say that we are equal? What are we trying to achieve through the ideal of equality? Are we trying to eliminate all differences of income and status? In other words, what kind of equality are we pursuing, and for whom? Some other questions that have been raised regarding Why talk about global or national inequalities when all around us there are inequalities to which nobody seems to object? Just look at the way my parents favour my brother the concept of equality which we will consider here are: to promote equality should we always treat all persons in exactly the same way? How should a society decide which differences of treatment or reward are acceptable and which are not?  Also, what kind of policies should we pursue to try and make the society more egalitarian? 3.2 WHAT IS EQUALITY? Take a look at these images. All of them make distinctions between human beings on grounds of race and colour and these appear to most of us as unacceptable. In fact, such distinctions violate our intuitive understanding of equality which tells us that all human beings should be entitled to the same respect and consideration because of their common humanity. However, treating people with equal respect need not mean always treating them in an identical way. No society treats all its members in exactly the same way under all conditions. The smooth functioning of society requires division of work and functions and people often enjoy different status and rewards on account of it. At times these differences of treatment may appear acceptable or even necessary. For instance, we usually do not feel that giving prime ministers, or army generals, a special official rank and status goes against the notion of equality, provided their privileges are not misused. But some other kinds of inequalities may seem unjust. For instance, if a child born in a slum is denied nutritious food or good education through no fault of his/her own, it may appear unfair to us. The question that arises is which distinctions and differences are acceptable and which are not? When people are treated differently just because they are born in a particular religion or race or caste or gender, we regard it as an unacceptable form of inequality. But human beings may pursue different ambitions and goals and not all may be equally successful. So long as they are able to develop the best in themselves we would not feel that equality has been undermined. Some may become good musicians while others may not be equally outstanding, some become famous scientists while others more noted for their hard work and conscientiousness. The commitment to the ideal of equality does not imply the elimination of all forms of differences. It merely suggests that the treatment we receive and the opportunities we enjoy must not be pre-determined by birth or social circumstance. Equality of Opportunities The concept of equality implies that all people, as human beings, are entitled to the same rights and opportunities to develop their skills and talents, and to pursue their goals and ambitions.  This means that in a society people may differ with regard to their choices and preferences. They may also have different talents and skills which results in some being more successful in their chosen careers than others. But just because only some become ace cricketers or successful lawyers, it does not follow that the society should be considered unequal. In other words, it is not the lack of equality of status or wealth or privilege that is significant but the inequalities in people s access to such basic goods, as education, health care, safe housing, that make for an unequal and unjust society. Natural and Social Inequalities A distinction has sometimes been made in political theory between natural inequalities and socially-produced inequalities. Natural inequalities are those that emerge between people as a result of their different capabilities and talents. These kinds of inequalities are different from socially-produced inequalities which emerge as a consequence of inequalities of opportunity or the exploitation of some groups in a society by others. Natural inequalities are considered to be the result of the different characteristics and abilities with which people are born. It is generally assumed that natural differences cannot be altered. Social inequalities on the other hand are those created by society. Certain societies may, for instance, value those who perform intellectual work over those who do manual work and reward them differently. They may treat differently people of different race, or colour, or gender, or caste. Differences of this kind reflect the values of a society and some of these may certainly appear to us to be unjust. This distinction is sometimes useful in helping us to distinguish between  acceptable and unfair inequalities in society but it is not always clear or self-evident. For instance, when certain inequalities in the treatment of people have existed over a long period of time they may appear to us as justifiable because they are based on natural inequalities, that is, characteristics that people are born with and cannot easily change. For example, women were for long described as  the weaker sex, considered timid and of lesser intelligence than men, needing special protection. Therefore, it was felt that denying women equal rights could be justified. Black people in Africa were considered by their colonial masters to be of lesser intelligence, child-like, and better at manual work, sports and music. This belief was used to justify institutions like slavery. All these assessments are now questioned. They are now seen as Men are superior to women. It is a natural inequality. You can t do anything about it. I get more marks than you in every subject. And I also help my mother in housework.  What makes you superior? Another problem which arises with the idea of natural differences is that some differences which could be considered natural need no longer be seen as unalterable. For instance, advances in medical science and technologies have helped many disabled people to function effectively in society.  Today, computers can help blind people, wheel chairs and artificial limbs can help in cases of physical disability, even a person s looks can be changed with cosmetic surgery. The famous physicist Stephen Hawking can hardly move or speak but he has made major contributions to science. It would seem unjust to most people today if disabled people are denied necessary help to overcome the effects of their disability or a fair reward for their work on the grounds that they are naturally less capable. Given all these complexities, it would be difficult to use the natural/ socially-produced distinction as a standard by which the laws and policies of a society can be assessed. For this reason many theorists today differentiate between inequality arising from our choices and inequalities operating on account of the family or circumstance in which a person is born. It is the latter that is a source of concern to advocates of equality and which they wish to minimise and eliminate. 3.3 THREE DIMENSIONS OF EQUALITY After considering what kind of social differences are unacceptable we need to ask what are the different dimensions of equality that we may pursue or seek to achieve in society. While identifying different kinds of inequalities that exist in society, various thinkers and ideologies have highlighted three main dimensions of equality namely, political, social and economic. It is only by addressing each of these three different dimensions of equality can we move towards a more just and equal society. In democratic societies political equality would normally include granting equal citizenship to all the members of the state. As you distinctions made by society as a result of the differences of power between people and nations rather than based on their inborn will read in the chapter on Citizenship, equal citizenship brings with it certain basic rights such as the right to vote, freedom of expression, movement and association and freedom of belief. These are rights which are considered necessary to enable citizens to develop themselves and participate in the affairs of the state. But they are legal rights, guaranteed by the constitution and laws. We know that considerable inequality can exist even in countries which grant equal rights to all citizens. These inequalities are often the result of differences in the resources and opportunities which are available to citizens in the social and economic spheres. For this reason a demand is often made for equal opportunities, or for  a level playing field. But we should remember that although political and legal equality by itself may not be sufficient to build a just and egalitarian society, it is certainly an important component of it. Political equality or equality before the law is an important first step in the pursuit of equality but it often needs to be supplemented by equality of opportunities. While the former is necessary to remove any legal hurdles which might exclude people from a voice in government and deny them access to available social goods, the pursuit of equality requires that people belonging to different groups and communities also have a fair and equal chance to compete for those goods and opportunities. For this, it is necessary to minimise the effects of social and economic inequalities and guarantee certain minimum conditions of life to all the members of the society   adequate health care, the opportunity for good education, adequate nourishment and a minimum wage, among other things. In the absence of such facilities it is exceedingly difficult for all the members of the society to compete on equal terms. Where equality of opportunity does not exist a huge pool of potential talent tends to be wasted in society. In India, a special problem regarding equal opportunities comes not just from lack of facilities but from some of the customs which may prevail in different parts of country, or among different groups. Women, for instance, may not enjoy equal rights of inheritance in some groups, or there may be social prohibitions regarding their taking part in certain kinds of activities, or they may even be Women should be allowed to join the combat units of the army and go up to the discouraged from obtaining higher education. The state has a significant role in such matters. It should make policies to prevent discrimination or harassment of women in public places or employment, to provide incentives to open up education or certain professions to women, and other such measures. But social groups and individuals also have a role to play in raising awareness and supporting those who want to exercise their At the simplest level, we would say that economic inequality exists in a society if there are significant differences in wealth, property or income between individuals or classes. One way of measuring the degree of economic inequality in a society would be to measure the relative difference between the richest and poorest groups. Another way could be to estimate the number of live below the absolute equality of wealth or income has probably never existed in a society. Most democracies today try to make equal opportunities available to people in the belief that this would at least give those who have talent and determination the chance to improve their condition. With equal INEQUALITIES IN EDUCATION Are the differences in the educational attainment of different communities depicted in the table below significant?  Could these differences have taken place just by chance? Or do these differences point to the working of the caste system? Which factor other than the caste system do you see at work here? Caste-community inequalities in higher education in urban India ALL INDIA AVERAGE National Sample Survey Organisation, 55th round survey, 1999-2000 READ A CARTOON Racial Inequality in the United States Find out more about racial inequality in the US. Which group or groups in our country suffer from similar inequality? What kind of policies have been adopted in the US to reduce this inequality? Is there something to be learnt from their experience? Can they learn something from our experience? opportunities, inequalities may continue to exist between individuals but there is the possibility of improving one s position in society with Inequalities which are entrenched, that is, which remain relatively untouched over generations, are more dangerous for a society. If in a society certain classes of people have enjoyed considerable wealth, and the power which goes with it, over generations, the society would become divided between those classes and others who have remained poor over generations. Over time such class differences can give rise to resentment and violence. Because of the power of the wealthy classes it might prove difficult to reform such a society to make it more open and egalitarian.   R.J. Matson, Cagle Cartoons Inc. (13.1.2006) Feminism is a political doctrine of equal rights for women and men. Feminists are those men and women who believe that many of the inequalities we see in society between men and women are neither natural nor necessary and can be altered so that both women and men can lead free and equal lives. According to feminists, inequality between men and women in society is the result of patriarchy. This term refers to a social, economic and cultural system that values men more than women and gives men power over women. Patriarchy is based on the assumption that men and women are different by nature and that this difference justifies their unequal positions in society. Feminists questions this way of thinking by making a distinction between  sex  i.e. biological difference between men and women, and  gender  which determines the different roles that men and women play in society. For instance, the biological fact that only women can become pregnant and bear children does not require that only women should look after children after they are born. Feminists show us that much of the inequality between men and women is produced by society and not by nature. Patriarchy produces a division of labour by which women are supposed to be responsible for  private  and  domestic  matters while men are responsible for work in the  public  domain. Feminists question this distinction by pointing out that in fact most women are also active in the  public  domain. That is, most women all over the world are employed in some form of work outside the home, but women continue to be solely responsible for housework as well. However, despite this  double burden  as feminists term it, women are given little or no say in decisions taken in the public domain. Feminists contend that this public/ private distinction and all forms of gender inequalities can and should be eliminated. Marxism and liberalism are two important political ideologies of our times. Marx was an important nineteenth century thinker who argued that the root cause of entrenched inequality was private ownership of important economic resources such as oil, or land, or forests, as well as other forms of property. He pointed out that such private ownership did not only make the class of owners wealthy, it also gave them political power. Such power enables them to influence state policies and laws and this could prove a threat to democratic government. Marxists and socialists feel that economic inequality provides support to other forms of social inequality such as differences of rank or privilege. Therefore, to tackle inequality in society we need to go beyond providing equal opportunities and try and ensure public control over essential resources and forms of property. Such views may be debatable but they have raised important issues which need to be addressed. An opposing point of view can be found in liberal theories. Liberals uphold the principle of competition as the most efficient and fair way of distributing resources and rewards in society. They believe that while states may have to intervene to try and ensure a minimum standard of living and equal opportunities for all, this cannot by itself bring equality and justice to society. Competition between people in free and fair conditions is the most just and efficient way of distributing rewards in a society. For them, as long as competition is open and free, inequalities are unlikely to become entrenched and people will get due reward for their talents and efforts. For liberals the principle of competition is the most just and efficient way of selecting candidates for jobs or admission to educational institutions. For instance, in our country many students hope for admission to professional courses and entry is highly competitive. From time to time, the government and the courts have stepped in to regulate educational institutions and the entrance tests to ensure that everybody gets a fair and equal chance to compete. Some may still not get admission but it is considered to be a fair way of distributing limited seats. Make a list of all the social and economic inequalities that you notice among the students of your own LET S DO IT D Unlike socialists, liberals do not believe that political, economic and social inequalities are necessarily linked. They maintain that inequalities in each of these spheres should be tackled appropriately. Thus, democracy could help to provide political equality but it might be necessary to also devise different strategies to deal with social differences and economic inequalities. The problem for liberals is not inequality as such, but unjust and entrenched inequalities which prevent individuals from developing their capabilities. 3.4  HOW CAN WE PROMOTE EQUALITY? We have already noted some of the basic differences among the socialists and the liberals on the most desirable way of achieving the goal of equality. While the relative merits and limitations of each of these points of view are being debated the world over, we still need to consider what principles and policies might be Socialism refers to a set of political ideas that emerged as a response to the inequalities present in, and reproduced by, the industrial capitalist economy. The main concern of Socialism is how to minimise existing inequality and distribute resources justly. Although advocates of socialism are not entirely opposed to the market, they favour some kind of government regulation, planning and control over certain key areas such as education and health care. In India the eminent socialist thinker Rammanohar Lohia, identified five kinds of inequalities that need to be fought against simultaneously: inequality between man and woman, inequality based on skin colour, caste-based inequality, colonial rule of some countries over others, and, of course, economic inequality. This might appear a self-evident idea today. But during Lohia s time it was common for the socialists to argue that class inequality was the only form of inequality worth struggling against. Other inequalities did not matter or would end automatically if economic inequality could be ended. Lohia argued that each of these inequalities had independent roots and had to be fought separately and simultaneously. He did not speak of revolution in the singular. For him struggle against these five inequalities constituted five revolutions. He added two more revolutions to this list:  revolution for civil liberties against unjust encroachments on private life and revolution for non-violence, for renunciation of weapons in favour of Satyagraha. These were the seven revolutions or Sapta Kranti which for Lohia was the ideal of socialism. considered necessary for pursuing equality. Specifically, we need to consider if the use of affirmative action is justified for purposes of bringing about equality. This issue has raised a lot of controversy in recent years and we will discuss this issue in the following section. Establishing Formal Equality The first step towards bringing about equality is, of course, ending the formal system of inequality and privileges. Social, economic and political inequalities all over the world have been protected by customs and legal systems that prohibited some sections of society from enjoying certain kinds of opportunities and rewards. Poor people were not granted the right to vote in a large number of countries. Women were not allowed to take up many professions and activities. The caste system in India prevented people from the  lower  castes from doing anything except manual labour. In many countries only people from some families could occupy Attainment of equality requires that all such restrictions or privileges should be brought to an end. Since many of these systems have the sanction of law, equality requires that the government and the law of the land should stop protecting these systems of inequality.  This is what our Constitution does. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Our Constitution also abolishes the practice of untouchability. Most modern constitutions and democratic governments have formally accepted the principle of equality and incorporated it as identical treatment by law to all citizens without any regard to their caste, race, religion or gender. Equality Through Differential Treatment However, as we noted earlier, formal equality or equality before law is necessary but not sufficient to realise the principle of equality. Sometimes it is necessary to treat people differently in order to ensure that they can enjoy equal rights. Certain differences between people may have to be taken into account for this purpose. For instance, disabled people may justifiably demand special ramps in public spaces so that they get an equal chance to enter public buildings. Or women working in call centres at night may need special protection during the journey to and from the centre so that their equal right to work may be protected. These should not be seen as infringements of equality but as enhancement of equality. What kinds of differences hinder access to equal opportunities and what kinds of policies may be pursued to overcome those hindrances are questions that are being discussed in almost all societies today. Some countries have used policies of affirmative action to enhance equality of opportunity. In our country we have relied on the policy of reservations. In the next section, we will attempt to understand the idea of affirmative action and understand some of the issues raised by specific policies within that framework. Make a list of all the facilities that students with various kinds of would need to learn as any other student. Which of these facilities are available in your LET S DO IT D Affirmative action is based on the idea that it is not sufficient to establish formal equality by law. When we wish to eliminate inequalities that are deeply rooted, it is necessary to take some more positive measures to minimise and eliminate entrenched forms of social inequalities. Most policies of affirmative action are thus designed to correct the cumulative effect of past inequalities. Affirmative action can however take many forms, from preferential spending on facilities for disadvantaged communities, such as, scholarships and hostels to special consideration for admissions to educational institutions and jobs. In our country we have adopted a policy of quotas or reserved seats in education and jobs to provide equality of opportunity to deprived groups, and this has been the subject of considerable debate and disagreement. The policy has been defended on the ground that certain groups have been victims of social prejudice and discrimination in the form of exclusion and segregation. These communities who have suffered in the past and been denied equal opportunities cannot be immediately expected to compete with others on equal terms. Therefore, in the interest of creating an egalitarian and just society they need to be given special protection and help. Special assistance in the form of affirmative action is expected to be a temporary or time-bound measure. The assumption is that special consideration will enable these communities to overcome the existing disadvantages and then compete with others on equal terms. Although policies of affirmative action are supported for making the society more equal, many theorists argue against them. They question whether treating people differently can ever lead to greater equality. Critics of positive discrimination, particularly policies of reservations, thus invoke the principle of equality to argue against such policies. They contend that any provision of reservations or quotas for the deprived in admissions for higher education or jobs is unfair as it arbitrarily denies other sections of society their right to equal treatment. They maintain that reservations are a form of reverse discrimination and they continue with the practices that the principle of equality questions and rejects. Equality requires that all persons be treated alike, and when we make distinctions between individuals on the basis of their caste or colour, we are likely to reinforce caste and racial prejudices. For these theorists, the important thing is to do away with social distinctions that divide our society. In the context of this debate, it is relevant to draw a distinction between equality as a guiding principle of state policy and equal rights of individuals. Individuals have a right to equal consideration for admission to educational institutions and public sector employment. But competition should be fair.  Sometimes when competing for limited seats or jobs people from deprived strata may be at a disadvantage. The needs and circumstances of a first generation learner whose parents and ancestors were illiterate are very different from those who are born into educated families. Members of excluded groups, whether they are dalits, women, or any other category, deserve and need some special help. To provide this, the state must devise social policies which would help to make such people equal and give them a fair chance to compete with others. The fact is that in the spheres of education and health care India has done far less for its deprived population than what is their due. Inequalities in school education are glaring. Many poor children in rural areas or urban slums have little chance of attending schools. If they do get the chance, their schools have little to offer that would be comparable to the facilities available in elite schools. The inequalities with which children enter school tend to continue to hamper their chances to improve their qualifications or get good jobs. These students face hurdles in gaining admission to elite professional courses because they lack the means to pay for special coaching. The fees for professional courses also may be prohibitively high. Consequently, they cannot compete on equal terms with the more privileged sections. Social and economic inequalities of this kind hinder the pursuit of equal opportunities. Most theorists today recognise this. What they contest is not the goal of equal opportunity but the policies Policies of affirmative and Scheduled Tribes should be extended to admission to that the state should pursue to achieve that goal. Should the state reserve seats for the deprived communities or should they provide special facilities that can help to develop talents and skills from an early age? How should we define who is deprived? Should we use an economic criterion to identify the deprived, or should we use social inequalities arising from the caste system in our country as the basis of identifying the deprived groups? These are aspects of social policy that are today being debated. Ultimately the policies that we choose would have to be justified in terms of their success in making the society more egalitarian and fair to all. While reflecting on the issue of equality, a distinction must also be made between treating everyone in an identical manner and treating everyone as equal. The latter may on occasions need differential treatment but in all such cases the primary consideration is to promote equality. Differential or special treatment may be considered to realise the goal of equality but it requires justification and careful reflection. Since differential treatment for different communities was part and parcel of the caste system and practices like apartheid, liberals are usually very wary of deviations from the norm of identical treatment. Consider the following situations. Is special and differential treatment justified in any of the following? Working women should receive maternity leave. A school should spend money to buy special equipment for two visually challenged students. Geeta plays brilliant basketball, so the school should build a basketball court for her so that she can develop her skills further. Jeet s parents want him to wear a turban in school, and Irfan s parents want him to pray on Friday afternoon, so the school should not insist that Jeet should wear a helmet while playing cricket, and Irfan s teacher should not ask him to stay back for extra classes on Friday. Many of these issues relating to the pursuit of equality have been raised by the women s movement. In the nineteenth century women struggled for equal rights. They demanded, for instance, the right to vote, the right to receive degrees in colleges and universities and the right to work   that is, the same rights as the men in their society. However, as they entered the job market they realised that women required special facilities in order to exercise these rights. For instance, they required some provision for maternity leave and cr ches in the workplace. Without special considerations of this kind, they could not seriously compete for jobs or enjoy a successful professional and personal life. They needed, in other words, sometimes to be treated differently if they are to enjoy the same rights As we deliberate on issues of equality and examine whether different treatment is warranted in a particular case, we need continuously to ask ourselves whether differential treatment is essential to ensure that a set of people can enjoy the same rights as the rest of society. Caution must, however, be exercised to see that differential treatment does not yield new structures of dominance and oppression, or become a means for some dominant groups to reassert special privileges and power in society. Differential treatment is intended and justified only as a means to promoting a just and Some people argue that inequality is natural while others maintain that it is equality which is natural and the inequalities which we notice around us are created by society. Which view do you support? Give There is a view that absolute economic equality is neither possible nor desirable. It is argued that the most a society can do is to try and reduce the gaps between the richest and poorest members of society. Do you agree? Match the following concepts with appropriate instances: (a) Affirmative action (i) Every adult citizen has a right to vote (b) Equality of opportunity (ii) Banks offer higher rate of interest to senior citizen (c) Equal Rights. (iii) Every child should get free education A government report on farmers  problems says that small and marginal farmers cannot get good prices from the market. It recommends that the government should intervene to ensure a better price but only for small and marginal farmers. Is this recommendation consistent with the principle of equality? Which of the following violate the principles of equality? And why? (a) Every child in class will read the text of the play by turn. (b) The Government of Canada encouraged white Europeans to migrate to Canada from the end of the Second World War till 1960. (c) There is a separate railway reservation counter for the senior (d) Access to some forest areas is reserved for certain tribal Here are some arguments in favour of the right to vote for women. Which of these are consistent with the idea of equality? Give reasons. (a) Women are our mothers. We shall not disrespect our mothers by denying them the right to vote. (b) Decisions of the government affect women as well as men, therefore they also should have a say in choosing the rulers. (c) Not granting women the right to vote will cause disharmony in the (d) Women constitute half of humanity. You cannot subjugate them for long by denying them the right to vote. Credit: Images on opening page: P. Sainath Just as we intuitively understand what love means even if we cannot explain all its different shades of meaning, we also have an intuitive understanding of justice even though we may not be able to define it precisely. In that sense justice is a lot like love. In addition, both love and justice evoke passionate responses from their advocates. And as with love, no one hates justice, everyone wants justice for oneself and to some extent for others also. But unlike love, which is an aspect of our relationships with a few people whom we know well, justice concerns our life in society, the way in which public life is ordered and the principles according to which social goods and social duties are distributed among different members of society. As such, questions of justice are of central importance for politics. After going through this chapter you should be able to: Identify some of the principles of justice which have been put forward in different societies and at different periods of time. Explain what is meant by distributive justice. Discuss John Rawls  argument that a fair and just society would be in the interest of all members and could be defended on rational grounds. Justice Social Justice 4.1 WHAT IS JUSTICE? All cultures and traditions have grappled with questions of justice although they may have interpreted the concept in different ways. For instance, in ancient Indian society, justice was associated with dharma and maintaining dharma or a just social order, was considered to be a primary duty of kings. In China, Confucius, the famous philosopher argued that kings should maintain justice by punishing wrong doers and rewarding the virtuous. In fourth century B.C. Athens (Greece), Plato discussed issues of justice in his book The Republic. Through a long dialogue between Socrates and his young friends, Glaucon and Adeimantus, Plato examined why we should be concerned about justice. The young people ask Socrates why we should be just. They observe that people who were unjust seemed to be much better off than those who were just. Those who twisted rules to serve their interests, avoided paying taxes and were willing to lie and be deceitful, were often more successful than those who were truthful and just. If one were smart enough to avoid being caught then it would seem that being unjust is better than being just. You may have heard people expressing similar sentiments even today. Socrates reminds these young people that if everyone were to be unjust, if everyone manipulated rules to suit their own interests, no one could be sure of benefiting from injustice. Nobody would be secure and this was likely to harm all of them.  Hence, it is in our own long- term interest to obey the laws and be just. Socrates clarified that we need to understand clearly what justice means in order to figure out why it is important to be just. He explained that justice does not only mean doing good to our friends and harm to our enemies, or pursuing our own interests. Justice involves the well-being of all people. Just as a doctor is  They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer injustice, evil; but that the evil is greater than the good. And so when men have both injustice and have had experience of both, not being able to avoid the one and obtain the other, they think that they had neither; hence there arise laws and mutual covenants; and that which is ordained by law is termed by them lawful (Glaucon to Socrates in concerned with the well-being of his/her patients, similarly the just ruler or the just government must be concerned with the well-being of the people. Ensuring the well-being of the people includes giving each person his due. The idea that justice involves giving each person his due continues to be an important part of our present day understanding of justice. However, our understanding of what is due to a person has changed from the time of Plato. Today, our understanding of what is just is closely linked to our understanding of what is due to each person as a human being. According to the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, human beings possess dignity. If all persons are granted dignity then what is due to each of them is that they have the opportunity to develop their talents and pursue their chosen goals.  Justice requires that we give due and equal consideration to all individuals. Equal Treatment for Equals Although there might be broad agreement in modern society about the equal importance of all people, it is not a simple matter to decide how to give each person his/her due.  A number of different principles have been put forward in this regard. One of the principles is the principle of treating equals equally. It is considered that all individuals share certain characteristics as human beings. Therefore they deserve equal rights and equal treatment. Some of the important rights which are granted in most liberal democracies today include civil rights such as the rights of life, liberty and property, political rights like the right to vote, which enable people to participate in political processes, and certain social rights which would include the right to enjoy equal opportunities with other members of the society. Apart from equal rights, the principle of treating equals equally would require that people should not be discriminated against on grounds of class, caste, race or gender. They should be judged on the basis of their work and actions and not on the basis of the group to which they belong. Therefore, if two persons from different castes perform the same kind of work, whether it be breaking stones or delivering Pizzas, they should receive the same kind of reward. If a person gets one hundred rupees for some work and another receives only seventy five rupees for the same work because they belong to Justice Social Justice different castes, then it would be unfair or unjust. Similarly, if a male teacher in a school gets a higher salary than a female teacher, then this difference would also be unjustifiable and wrong. However, equal treatment is not the only principle of justice. There could be circumstances in which we might feel that treating everybody equally would be unjust.  How, for instance, would you react if it was decided in your school that all those who did an exam should get equal marks because they are all students of the same school and did the same exam? Here you might think it would be more fair if students were awarded marks according to the quality of their answer papers and also, possibly, the degree of effort they had put in. In other words, provided everybody starts from the same base line of equal rights, justice in such cases would mean rewarding people in proportion to the scale and quality of their effort. Most people would agree that although people should get the same reward for the same work, it would be fair and just to reward different kinds of work differently if we take into account factors such as the effort required, the skills required, the possible dangers involved in that work, and so on. If we use these criteria we may find that certain kinds of workers in our society are not paid a wage which takes such factors sufficiently into account. For instance, miners, skilled craftsmen, or people in sometimes dangerous but socially useful professions like policemen, may not always get a reward which is just if we compare it to what some others in society may be earning. For justice in society, the principle of equal treatment needs to be balanced with the principle of proportionality. Recognition of Special Needs A third principle of justice which we recognise is for a society to take into account special needs of people while distributing rewards or duties. This would be considered a way of promoting social justice. In terms of their basic status and rights as members of the society justice may require that people be treated equally. But even non- discrimination between people and rewarding them proportionately to their efforts might not be enough to ensure that people enjoy equality in other aspects of their lives in society nor that the society People with special needs or disabilities could be considered unequal in some particular respect and deserving of special help. But it is not always easy to get agreement regarding which inequalities of people should be recognised for providing them special help. Physical disabilities, age or lack of access to good education or health care, are some of the factors which are considered grounds for special treatment in many countries. It is believed that if people who enjoy very different standard of living and opportunities are treated equally in all respects with those who have been deprived of even the basic minimum needs to live a healthy and productive life, the result is likely to be an unequal society, not an egalitarian and just one. In our country, lack of access to good education or health care and other such facilities is often found combined with Examine the following situations and discuss whether they are just. In each case discuss the principle of justice that might be used in defence of your argument. Suresh, a visually impaired student, gets three hours and thirty minutes to finish his mathematics paper, while the rest of the class gets only three hours. Geeta walks with a limp. The teacher decided to give her also three hours and thirty minutes to finish her mathematics paper. A teacher gives grace marks to the weaker students in class, to boost their morale. A professor distributes different question papers to different students based on her evaluation of There is a proposal to reserve 33 per cent of the seats in the Parliament for women. as a whole is just. The principle of taking account of the special needs of people does not necessarily contradict the principle of equal treatment so much as extend it because the principle of treating equals equally could imply that people who are not equal in certain important respects could be treated differently. Justice Social Justice social discrimination on grounds of caste. The Constitution therefore allowed for reservations of government jobs and quotas for admissions to educational institutions for people belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Tribes. Our discussion of different principles of justice has indicated that governments might sometimes find it difficult to harmonise the three principles of justice which have been discussed   equal treatment for equals, recognition of different efforts and skills while determining rewards and burdens, and provision of minimum standard of living and equal opportunities to the needy. Pursuing equality of treatment by itself might sometimes work against giving due reward to merit. Emphasising rewarding merit as the main principle of justice might mean that marginalised sections would be at a disadvantage in many areas because they have not had access to facilities such as good nourishment or education.  Different groups in the country might favour different policies depending upon which principle of justice they emphasise. It then becomes a function of governments to harmonise the different principles to promote a just society. 4.2 JUST DISTRIBUTION To achieve social justice in society, governments might have to do more than just ensure that laws and policies treat individuals in a fair manner. Social justice also concerns the just distribution of goods and services, whether it is between nations or between different Why is the statue of justice blindfolded? Of course she needs to be impartial. But I wonder how then does she see the special needs of people? She is blindfolded because she needs to be impartial. groups and individuals within a society.  If there are serious economic or social inequalities in a society, it might become necessary to try and redistribute some of the important resources of the society to provide something like a level playing field for citizens. Therefore, within a country social justice would require not only that people be treated equally in terms of the laws and policies of the society but also that they enjoy some basic equality of life conditions and opportunities. This is seen as necessary for each person to be able to pursue his/her objectives and express himself. In our country for instance, the Constitution abolished the practice of untouchability to promote social equality and ensure that people belonging to  lower  castes have access to temples, jobs and basic necessities like water. Different state governments have also taken some measures to redistribute important resources like land in a more fair manner by instituting land reforms. Differences of opinion on matters such whether, and how, to distribute resources and ensure equal access to education and jobs arouse fierce passions in society and even sometimes provoke violence. People believe the future of themselves and their families may be at stake.  We have only to remind ourselves about the anger and even violence which has sometimes been roused by proposals to reserve seats in educational institutions or in government employment in our country. As students of political theory however we should be able to calmly examine the issues involved in terms of our understanding of the principles of justice. Can schemes to help the disadvantaged be justified in terms of a theory of justice? In the next section, we will discuss the theory of just distribution put forward by the well-known political philosopher, John Rawls. Rawls has argued that there could indeed be a rational justification for acknowledging the need to provide help to the least privileged members of a society. 4.3 JOHN RAWLS  THEORY OF JUSTICE If people are asked to chose the kind of society in which they would like to live, they are likely to chose one in which the rules and organisation of society allot them a privileged position. We cannot expect everyone to put aside their personal interests and think of Justice Social Justice the good of society, especially if they believe that their decision is going to have an impact on the kind of life and opportunities their children will have in the future. Indeed, we often expect parents to think of and support what is best for their children. But such perspectives cannot form the basis of a theory of justice for a society. So how do we reach a decision that would be both fair and just? John Rawls has tried to answer this question. He argues that the only way we can arrive at a fair and just rule is if we imagine ourselves to be in a situation in which we have to make decisions about how society should be organised although we do not know which position we would ourselves occupy in that society. That is, we do not know what kind of family we would be born in, whether we would be born into an  upper  caste or  lower  caste family,  rich or poor, privileged or disadvantaged. Rawls argues that if we do not know, in this sense, who we will be and what options would be available to us in the future society, we will be likely to support a decision about the rules and organisation of that future society which would be fair for all the members. Rawls describes this as thinking under a  veil of ignorance. He expects that in such a situation of complete ignorance about our possible position and status in society, each person would decide in the way they generally do, that is, in terms of their own interests. But since no one knows who he would be, and what is going to benefit him, each will envisage the future society from the point of view of the worst-off.  It will be clear to a person who can reason and think for himself, that those who are born privileged will enjoy certain special opportunities. But, what if they have the misfortune of being born in a disadvantaged section of society where few opportunities would be available to them? Hence, it would make sense for each person, acting in his or her own interest, to try to think of rules of organisation that will ensure reasonable opportunities to the weaker sections. The attempt will be to see that important resources, like education, health, shelter, etc., are available to all persons, even if they are not part of the upper class. It is of course not easy to erase our identities and to imagine oneself under a veil of ignorance. But then it is equally difficult for most people to be self- sacrificing and share their strangers. That is why we habitually associate self- sacrifice with heroism. Given these human failings and limitations, it is better for us to think of a framework that does not actions. The merit of the  veil of ignorance  position is that it expects people to just be their usual rational selves: they are expected to think for themselves and choose what they regard to be in their interest. The pertinent thing however is that when they choose under the  veil of ignorance  they will find that it is in their interest to think from the position of the worst-off. Wearing the imagined veil of ignorance is the first step in arriving at a system of fair laws and policies. It will be evident that rational persons will not only see things from the perspective of the worst-off, they will also try to ensure that the policies they frame benefit the society as a whole. Both things have to go hand-in-hand. Since no one knows what position they will occupy in the future society, each will seek rules that protect them in case they happen to be born among the worst-off. But it would make sense if they also try to ensure that their chosen policy does not also make those who are better-off weaker because it is also possible that they could be born into a privileged position in the future society. Therefore, it would be in the interests of all that society as a whole should benefit from the rules and policies that are decided and not just any particular section. Such fairness would be the outcome of rational action, not benevolence or generosity. Justice Social Justice Rawls therefore argues that rational thinking, not morality, could lead us to be fair and judge impartially regarding how to distribute the benefits and burdens of a society. In his example, there are no goals or norms of morality that are given to us in advance and we remain free to determine what is best for ourselves. It is this belief which makes Rawls  theory an important and compelling way to approach the question of fairness and justice. 4.4 PURSUING SOCIAL JUSTICE If in a society deep and persistent divisions exist between those who enjoy greater wealth and property, and the power which goes with such ownership, and those who are excluded and deprived, we would say that social justice is lacking there. We are not talking here merely about the different standards of living which may be enjoyed by different individuals in a society. Justice does not require absolute equality and sameness in the way in which people live. But a society would be considered unjust if the differences between rich and poor are so great that they seem to be living in different worlds altogether, and if the relatively deprived have no chance at all to improve their condition however hard they may work. In other words, a just society should provide people with the basic minimum conditions to enable them to live healthy and secure lives and develop their talents as well as equal opportunities to pursue their chosen goals in society. How can we decide what are the basic minimum conditions of life needed by people? Various methods of calculating the basic needs of people have been devised by different governments and by international organisations like the World Health Organisation. But in general it is agreed that the basic amount of nourishment needed to remain healthy, housing, supply of clean drinking water, education and a minimum wage would constitute an important part of these basic conditions. Providing people with their basic needs is considered to be one of the responsibilities of a democratic government. However, providing such basic conditions of life to all citizens may pose a heavy burden on governments, particularly in countries like India which have a large number of poor people. LET S DO IT D of the minimum food, income, water and such facilities have been made agencies and U.N. in your school library, or on the internet, for any Even if we all agree that states should try and help the most disadvantaged members of the society to enjoy some degree of equality with others, disagreements could still arise regarding the best methods of achieving this goal. A debate is currently going on in our society, as well as in other parts of the world, about whether promoting open competition through free markets would be the best way of helping the disadvantaged without harming the better- off members of a society, or whether the government should take on the responsibility of providing a basic minimum to the poor, if necessary even through a redistribution of resources. In our country these different approaches are being supported by different political groups who debate the relative merits of different schemes for helping marginalised sections of the population such as the rural or urban poor. We will briefly examine this debate. Free Markets versus State Intervention Supporters of free markets maintain that as far as possible, individuals should be free to own property and enter into contracts and agreements with others regarding prices and wages and profits. They should be free to compete with each other to gain the greatest amount of benefit. This is a simple description of a free market. Supporters of the free market believe that if markets are left free of state interference the sum of market transactions would ensure overall a just distribution of benefits and duties in society. Those with merit and talent would be rewarded accordingly while the A Just society is that society in which ascending sense of reverence and descending sense of contempt is dissolved   B.R. Ambedkar Justice Social Justice incompetent would get a lesser reward. They would maintain that whatever be the outcome of market distribution it would be just. However, not all free market supporters today would support absolutely unregulated markets. Many would now be willing to accept certain restrictions, for instance, states could step in to ensure a basic minimum standard of living to all people so that they are able to compete on equal terms. But they might argue that even here the most efficient way of providing people with basic services might be to allow markets in health care, education, and such services, to develop. In other words, private agencies should be encouraged to provide such services while state policies should try to empower people to buy those services. It might also be necessary for the state to give special help to the old and the sick who cannot compete. But apart from this, the role of the state should only be to maintain a framework of laws and regulations to ensure that competition between individuals remains free of coercion and other obstacles. They maintain that a free market is the basis of a fair and just society. The market, it is said, does not care about the caste or religion of the person; it does not see whether you are a man or a woman. It is neutral and concerned with the talents and skills that you have. If you have the merit, then nothing else matters. One of the arguments put forward in favour of market distribution is that it gives us more choices. There is no doubt that the market system gives us more choices as consumers. We can choose the rice we eat and the school we go to, provided that we have the means to pay for them. But regarding basic goods and services what is important is the availability of good quality goods and services at a cost people can afford. If private agencies do not find this profitable for them, they may prefer not to enter that particular market, or to provide cheap and substandard services. That is why there may be few private schools in remote rural areas and the few which have been set up may be of low quality. The same would be true of health care or housing. In such situations the government might have to step in. Another argument often heard in defence of free markets and private enterprise is that the quality of services they provide is often superior to that provided in government institutions. But the cost of such services may put them out of the reach of the poor. Private business tends to go where business would be most profitable and hence free markets eventually tend to work in the interest of the strong, the wealthy and the powerful. The result may be to deny, rather than extend, opportunities for those who are relatively weak Arguments can be put forward on both sides of the debate but free markets often exhibit a tendency to work in favour of the already privileged. This is why many argue that to ensure social justice the state should step in to see that basic facilities are made available to all the members of a society. In a democratic society disagreements about issues of distribution and justice are inevitable and even healthy because they force us to examine different points of view and rationally defend our own views. Politics is about the negotiation of such disagreements through debate. In our own country many kinds of social and economic inequalities exist and much remains to be done if they are to be reduced. Studying the different principles of justice should help us to discuss the issues involved and come to an agreement regarding the best way of pursuing justice. Justice implies something which it is not only right to do and wrong not to do; but which some individual person can claim from us as his moral right.   J. S. Mill Justice Social Justice What does it mean to give each person his/her due?  How has the meaning of  giving each his due  changed over time? Briefly discuss the three principles of justice outlined in the chapter? Explain each with examples. Does the principle of considering the special needs of people conflict with the principle of equal treatment for all? How does Rawls use the idea of a veil of ignorance to argue that fair and just distribution can be defended on rational grounds? What are generally considered to be the basic minimum requirements of people for living a healthy and productive life? What is the responsibility of governments in trying to ensure this minimum to all? Which of the following arguments could be used to justify state action to provide basic minimum conditions of life to all citizens? (a) Providing free services to the poor and needy can be justified as an act of charity. (b) Providing all citizens with a basic minimum standard of living is one way of ensuring equality of opportunity. (c) Some people are naturally lazy and we should be kind to them. (d) Ensuring basic facilities and a minimum standard of living to all is a recognition of our shared humanity and a human right. Credit: Image on opening page: Shweta Rao In everyday life we often talk of our rights. As members of a democratic country we may speak of such rights as the right to vote, the right to form political parties, the right to contest elections and so on. But apart from the generally accepted political and civil rights, people today are also making new demands for rights such as the right to information, right to clean air or the right to safe drinking water. Rights are claimed not only in relation to our political and public lives but also in relation to our social and personal relationships. Moreover, rights may be claimed not only for adult human beings but also for children, unborn foetuses, and even animals. The notion of rights is thus invoked in a variety of different ways by different people. In this chapter we will explore: What do we mean when we speak of rights? What is the basis on which rights are claimed? What purpose do rights serve and, why are they so important? 5.1 WHAT ARE RIGHTS? A right is essentially an entitlement or a justified claim. It denotes what we are entitled to as citizens, as individuals and as human beings. It is something that we consider to be due to us; something that the rest of society must recognise as being a legitimate claim that must be upheld. This does not mean that everything that I regard to be necessary and desirable is a right. I may want to wear the clothes of my choice to school rather than the prescribed uniform. I may want to stay out late at night but this does not mean that I have a right to dress in any way I like at school or to return home when I choose to do so. There is a distinction between what I want and think I am entitled to, and what can be designated as rights. Rights are primarily those claims that I along with others regard to be necessary for leading a life of respect and dignity. In fact, one of the grounds on which rights have been claimed is that they represent conditions that we collectively see as a source of self- respect and dignity. For example, the right to livelihood may be considered necessary for leading a life of dignity. Being gainfully employed gives a person economic independence and thus is central for his/her dignity.  Having our basic needs met gives us freedom to pursue our talents and interests. Or, take the right to express ourselves freely.  This right gives us the opportunity to be creative and original, whether it be in writing, or dance, or music, or any other creative activity. But freedom of expression is also important for democratic government since it allows for the free expression of beliefs and opinions. Rights such as the right to a livelihood, or freedom of expression, would be important for all human beings who live in society and they are described as universal in nature. Another ground on which rights have been claimed is that they are necessary for our well-being. They help individuals to develop their talents and skills. A right like the right to education, for instance, helps to develop our capacity to reason, gives us useful skills and enables us to make informed choices in life. It is in this sense that education can be designated as a universal right. However, if an activity is injurious to our health and well-being it cannot be claimed as a right. For instance, since medical research has shown that prohibited drugs are injurious to one s health and since they affect our relations with others, we cannot insist that we have a right to inhale or inject drugs or smoke tobacco. In the case of smoking it may even be injurious to the health of people who may be around the smoker. Drugs may not only injure our health but they may also sometimes change our behaviour patterns and make us a danger to other people. In terms of our definition of rights, smoking or taking banned drugs cannot be claimed as a right. 5.2 WHERE DO RIGHTS COME FROM? In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, political theorists argued that rights are given to us by nature or God. The rights of men were derived from natural law. This meant that rights were not conferred by a ruler or a society, rather we are born with them. As such these rights are inalienable and no one can take these away from us. They identified three natural rights of man: the right to life, liberty and property. All other rights were said to be derived from these basic rights. The idea that we are born with certain rights, is a very powerful notion because it implies that no state or organisation should take away what has been given by the law of nature. This conception of natural rights has been used widely to oppose the exercise of arbitrary power by states and governments and to safeguard individual freedom. In recent years, the term human rights is being used more than the term natural rights. This is because the idea of there being a natural law, or a set of norms that are laid down for us by nature, or God, appears unacceptable today. Rights are increasingly seen as guarantees that human beings themselves seek or arrive at in order to lead a minimally good life. The assumption behind human rights is that all persons are entitled to certain things simply because they are human beings. As a human being each person is unique and equally valuable. This means that all persons are equal and no one is born to serve others. Go through recent make a list of people s movements that have made proposals for new kinds of rights? LET S DO ITD Each of us possesses an intrinsic value, hence we must have equal opportunities to be free and realise our full potential. This conception of a free and equal self is increasingly being used to challenge existing inequalities based on race, caste, religion and gender. Today, the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights builds upon this understanding of rights and it attempts to recognise those claims that the world community collectively sees as being important for leading a life of dignity The notion of universal human rights has been used by oppressed people all over the world to challenge laws which segregate them and deny them equal opportunities and rights. In fact, it is through the struggles of groups that have felt excluded that the interpretation of existing rights has sometimes been altered. Slavery has, for instance, been abolished, but there are other struggles that have only had a limited success. Even today there are communities struggling to define humanity in a way which includes them. The list of human rights which people have claimed has expanded over the years as societies face new threats and challenges. For instance, we are very conscious KANT ON HUMAN DIGNITY... everything has either a price or a dignity. What has a price is such that something else can also be put in its place as its equivalent; by contrast, that which is elevated above all price, and admits of no equivalent, has a dignity.  Human beings, unlike all other objects, possess dignity. They are, for this reason valuable in themselves. For the eighteenth century German philosopher, Immanuel Kant, this simple idea had a deep meaning. It meant that every person has dignity and ought to be so treated by virtue of being a human being. A person may be uneducated, poor or powerless. He may even be dishonest or immoral. Yet, he remains a human being and deserves to be given some minimum dignity. For Kant, to treat people with dignity was to treat them morally. This idea became a rallying point for those struggling against social hierarchies and for human rights. Kant s views represent, what is called, the moral conception of rights. This position rests upon two arguments. First, we should be treating others as we would like to be treated ourselves.  Second, we should make sure that we don t treat the other person as means to our ends. We should not treat people as we treat a pen, a car, or a horse. That is, we should respect people not because they are useful to us but because they are, after all, human today of the need to protect the natural environment and this has generated demands for rights to clean air, water, sustainable development, and the like. A new awareness about the people, especially women, children or the sick, face in times of war or natural crisis has also led to demands for a right to livelihood, rights of children and the like. Such claims express a sense of moral outrage about infringements of peoples  dignity and they also act as a rallying call to people to try and extend rights to all human beings. We should not understate the extent and power of such claims. They often invoke wide support. You may have heard about the pop star Bob Geldof  s recent appeal to western governments to end poverty in Africa and seen T.V. reports about the scale of support which he received from 5.3 LEGAL RIGHTS AND THE STATE While claims for human rights appeal to our moral self, the degree of success of such appeals depends on a number of factors, most important of which is the support of governments and the law. This is why so much importance is placed on the legal recognition of rights. A Bill of Rights is enshrined in the constitutions of many countries. Constitutions represent the highest law of the land and so constitutional recognition of certain rights gives them a primary importance. In our country we call them Fundamental Rights. Other laws and policies are supposed to respect the rights granted in the Constitution. The rights mentioned in the Constitution would be those which are considered to be of basic importance. In some cases these may be supplemented by claims which gain importance because of the particular history and customs of a country. In India, for instance, we have a provision to ban untouchability which draws attention to a traditional social practice in the country. So important is the legal and constitutional recognition of our claims that several theorists define rights as claims that are recognised by the state. The legal endorsement certainly gives our rights a special status in society but it is not the basis on which rights are claimed. As we discussed earlier, rights have steadily been expanded and reinterpreted to include previously excluded groups and to reflect our contemporary understanding of what it means to lead a life of dignity and respect. However, in most cases the claimed rights are directed towards the state. That is, through these rights people make demands upon the state. When I assert my right to education, I call upon the state to make provisions for my basic education. Society may also accept the importance of education and contribute to it on its own. Different groups may open schools and fund scholarships so that children of all classes can get the benefit of education. But the primary responsibility rests upon the state. It is the state that must initiate necessary steps to ensure that my right to education is fulfilled. Thus, rights place an obligation upon the state to act in certain kinds of ways. Each right indicates what the state must do as well as what it must not do. For instance, my right to life obliges the state to make laws that protect me from injury by others. It calls upon the state to punish those who hurt me or harm me. If a society feels that the right to life means a right to a good quality of life, it expects the state to pursue policies that provide for clean environment along with other conditions that may be necessary for a healthy life. In other words, my right here places certain obligations upon the state to act in a certain way. Rights not only indicate what the state must do, they also suggest what the state must refrain from doing. My right to liberty as a person, for instance, suggests that the state cannot simply arrest me at its own will. If it wishes to put me behind bars, it must defend that action; it must give reasons for curtailing my liberty before a judicial court. This is why the police are required to produce an arrest warrant before taking me away. My rights thus place certain constraints upon state actions. To put it another way, our rights ensure that the authority of the state is exercised without violating the sanctity of individual life and liberty. The state may be the sovereign authority; the laws it makes may be enforced with force, but the sovereign state exists not for its own sake but for the sake of the individual. It is people who matter more and it is their well-being that must be pursued by the government in power. The rulers are accountable for their actions and must not forget that law exists to ensure the good of the people. 5.4 KINDS OF RIGHTS Most democracies today begin by drawing up a charter of political rights. Political rights give to the citizens the right to equality before law and the right to participate in the political process. They include such rights as the right to vote and elect representatives, the right to contest elections, the right to form political parties or join them. Political rights are supplemented by civil liberties. The latter refers to the right to a free and fair trial, the right to express one s views freely, the right to protest and express dissent. Collectively, civil liberties and political rights form the basis of a democratic system of government. But, as was mentioned before, rights aim to protect the well-being of the individual. Political rights contribute to it by making the government accountable to the people, by giving greater importance to the concerns of the individual over that of the rulers and by ensuring that all persons have an opportunity to influence the decisions of the government. However, our rights of political participation can only be exercised fully when our basic needs, of food, shelter, clothing, health, are met. For a person living on the pavements and struggling to meet these basic needs, political rights by themselves have little value. They require certain facilities like an adequate wage to meet their newspapers of the last few days and identify cases of rights violations discussed. What should the government and civil society do to prevent such violations? LET S DO ITD basic needs and reasonable conditions of work. Hence democratic societies are beginning to recognise these obligations and providing economic rights. In some countries, citizens, particularly those with low incomes, receive housing and medical facilities from the state; in others, unemployed persons receive a certain minimum wage so that they can meet their basic needs. In India the government has recently introduced a rural employment guarantee scheme, among other measures to help the poor. Today, in addition to political and economic rights more and more democracies are recognising the cultural claims of their citizens. The right to have primary education in one s mother tongue, the right to establish institutions for teaching one s language and culture, are today recognised as being necessary for leading a good life. The list of rights has thus steadily increased in democracies. While some rights, primarily the right to life, liberty, equal treatment, and the right to political participation are seen as basic rights that must receive priority, other conditions that are necessary for leading a decent life, are being recognised as justified claims or rights. Which of the following rights granted to groups/ communities are justifiable? Discuss. Jain community in a town sets up its own school and enrols students only from its own community. Purchase of land or property in Himachal Pradesh is restricted to those who are residents in that The principal of a co-ed college issued a circular that no girl should wear any  western  dress. A Panchayat in Haryana decided that the boy and the girl from different castes who married each other will not be allowed to live in the village. The right to culture means that no one should be allowed to make films that offend cultural beliefs of 5.5 RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES Rights not only place obligations upon the state to act in a certain way   for instance, to ensure sustainable development   but they also place obligations upon each of us. Firstly, they compel us to think not just of our own personal needs and interests but to defend some things as being good for all of us. Protecting the ozone layer, minimising air and water pollution, maintaining the green cover by planting new trees and preventing cutting down of forests, maintaining the ecological balance, are things that are essential for all of us. They represent the  common-good  that we must act to protect for ourselves as well as for the future generations who are entitled to inherit a safe and clean world without which they cannot lead a reasonably good life. Secondly, they require that I respect the rights of others. If I say that I must be given the right to express my views I must also grant the same right to others. If I do not want others to interfere in the choices I make   the dress I wear or the music I listen to   I must refrain from interfering in the choices that others make. I must leave them free to choose their music and clothes. I cannot use the right to free speech to incite a crowd to kill my neighbour. In exercising my rights, I cannot deprive others of their rights. My rights are, in other words, limited by the principle of equal and same rights for all. Thirdly, we must balance our rights when they come into conflict. For instance, my right to freedom of expression allows me to take pictures; however, if I take pictures of a person bathing in his house without his consent and post them on the internet, that would be a violation of his right to privacy. Fourthly, citizens must be vigilant about limitations which may be placed on their rights. A currently debated topic concerns the increased restrictions which many governments are imposing on the civil liberties of citizens on the grounds of national security. Protecting national security may be defended as necessary for safeguarding the rights and well-being of citizens. But at what point could the restrictions imposed as necessary for security themselves become a threat to the rights of people? Should a country facing the threat of terrorist bombings be allowed to curtail the liberty of citizens? Should it be allowed to arrest people on mere suspicion? Should it be allowed to intercept their mail or tap their phones? Should it be allowed to use torture to extract confession? In such situations the question to ask is whether the person concerned poses an imminent threat to society. Even arrested persons should be allowed legal counsel and the opportunity to present their case before a magistrate or a court of law. We need to be extremely cautious about giving governments powers which could be used to curtail the civil liberties of individuals for such powers can be misused. Governments can become authoritarian and undermine the very reasons for which governments exist   namely, the well-being of the members of the state. Hence, even though rights can never be absolute, we need to be vigilant in protecting our rights and those of others for they form the basis of a democratic society. One man s rights end where the other man s On 10 December 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Following this historic act the Assembly called upon all Member countries to publicise the text of the Declaration and  to cause it to be disseminated, displayed, read and expounded principally in schools and other educational institutions, without distinction based on the political status of countries or territories.  Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world, Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people, Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law, Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations, Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realisation of this pledge, Now, therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under For more details, visit www.un.org What are rights and why are they important? What are the bases on which claims to rights can be made? On what grounds are some rights considered to be universal in nature? Identify three rights which you consider universal. Give reasons. Discuss briefly some of the new rights claims which are being put forward in our country today   for example the rights of tribal peoples to protect their habitat and way of life, or the rights of children against Differentiate between political, economic and cultural rights. Give examples of each kind of right. Rights place some limits on the authority of the state. Explain with Credit: Image on opening page: The National Archives and Records Administration, United States of America Citizenship implies full and equal membership of a political community. In this chapter we will explore what exactly this means today. In Sections 6.2 and 6.3 we will look at some debates and struggles which are going on regarding the interpretation of the term  full and equal membership. Section 6.4 will discuss the relationship between citizens and the nation and the criteria of citizenship adopted in different countries. Theories of democratic citizenship claim that citizenship should be universal. Does this mean that every person today should be accepted as a member of one or other state? then How can we explain the existence of so many stateless people? This issue will be discussed in Section 6.5. The last section 6.6 will discuss the issue of global citizenship. Does it exist and could it replace national citizenship? After going through this chapter you should be able to explain the meaning of citizenship, and discuss some of the areas in which that meaning is being expanded or Citizenship has been defined as full and equal membership of a political community. In the contemporary world, states provide a collective political identity to their members as well as certain rights. Therefore we think of ourselves as Indians, or Japanese, or Germans, depending on the state to which we belong. Citizens expect certain rights from their state as well as help and protection wherever they may travel. The importance of full membership of a state can be appreciated if we think of the condition of the thousands of people in the world who have the bad fortune to be forced to live as refugees or illegal migrants because no state is willing to grant them membership. Such people are not guaranteed rights by any state and generally live in precarious conditions. For them full membership of a state of their choice is a goal for which they are willing to struggle, as we see today with Palestinian refugees in the Middle East. nature of the rights granted to vary from state to state but in they would include rights like the right to vote, civil rights like the freedom of speech or belief, and some socio-economic rights which could include the right to a minimum wage, or the right to education. Equality of rights and status is one of the basic rights Each of the rights now enjoyed by citizens has been won after struggle. Some of the earliest struggles were fought by people to assert their independence and rights against powerful monarchies. Many European countries experienced such struggles, some of them violent, like the French Revolution in 1789. In the colonies of Asia and Africa, demands for equal citizenship formed part of their struggle for independence from colonial rulers. In South Africa, the black African population had to undertake a long struggle against the ruling white minority for equal citizenship. This continued until the early 1990s. Struggles to achieve full membership and equal rights continue even now in many parts of the world. You may have read about the women s movement and the dalit movement in our country. Their purpose is to change public opinion by drawing attention to their needs as well as to influence government policy to ensure them equal rights and opportunities. During seventeenth to twentieth century, white people of Europe established their rule over the black people in South Africa. Read the following description about the policy practices in South Africa till 1994. The whites had the right to vote, contest elections and elect government; they were free to purchase property and go to any place in the country. Blacks did not have such rights. Separate colonies for whites and blacks were established. The blacks had to take  passes  to work in white neighbourhoods. They were not allowed to keep their families in the white areas. The schools were also separate for the people of different colour. Do you think the Blacks had full and equal membership in South Africa? Give reasons. What does the above description tell us about the relationship of different groups in South Africa? However, citizenship is about more than the relationship between states and their members. It is also about citizen-citizen relations and involves certain obligations of citizens to each other and to the society. These would include not just the legal obligations imposed by states but also a moral obligation to participate in, and contribute to, the shared life of the community. Citizens are also considered to be the inheritors and trustees of the culture and natural resources of the country. A good way to understand a political concept is to look for instances where its accepted meaning is being questioned by groups who feel that it does not take account of their needs and aspirations. 6.2 FULL AND EQUAL MEMBERSHIP If you have ever travelled in a crowded railway compartment or bus you will be familiar with the way in which those who may have earlier fought each other to enter, once inside discover a shared interest in keeping others out! A division soon develops between  insiders  and  outsiders  with  outsiders  being seen as a threat. Similar processes take place from time to time in cities, regions, or even the nation as a whole. If jobs, facilities like medical care or education, and natural resources like land or water, are limited, demands may be made to restrict entry to  outsiders  even though they may be fellow citizens. You may remember the slogan  Mumbai for Mumbaikars  which expressed such feelings. Many similar struggles have taken place in different parts of India and the world. This raises questions about what  full and equal membership  really means? Does it mean that citizens should enjoy equal rights examples of activities of citizens in your area intended to help others, or improve the area, or protect the some of the activities undertaken by young people of your age- LET S DO IT D and opportunities wherever in the country they may decide to live, study, or work? Does it mean that all citizens, rich or poor, should enjoy certain basic rights and facilities? In this section we will explore the meaning of citizenship by focusing on the first of these questions. One of the rights granted to citizens in our country, and in many others, is freedom of movement. This right is of particular importance for workers. Labour tends to migrate in search of jobs when opportunities are not available near their homes. Some people may even travel outside the country in search of jobs. Markets for skilled and unskilled workers have developed in different parts of our country. For instance, I.T. workers may flock to towns like Bangalore. Nurses from Kerala may be found all over the country. The booming building industry in town attracts workers from different parts of the MARTIN LUTHER KING The 1950s witnessed the emergence of Civil Rights Movements against inequalities that existed between black and white populations in many of the southern states of the USA. Such inequalities were maintained in these states by a set of laws called Segregation Laws through which the black people were denied many civil and political rights. These laws created separate areas for coloured and white people in various civic amenities like railways, buses, theatres, housing, hotels, restaurants, etc. Martin Luther King Jr. was a black leader of the movement against these laws. King gave many arguments against the prevailing laws of segregation. First, in terms of self-worth and dignity every human person in the world is equal regardless of one s race or colour. Second, King argued that segregation is like  social leprosy  on the body politic because it inflicts deep psychological wounds on the people who suffer as a result of such laws. King argued that the practice of segregation diminishes the quality of life for the white community also. He illustrates this point by examples. The white community, instead of allowing the black people to enter some community parks as was directed by the court, decided to close them. Similarly, some baseball teams had to be disbanded, as the authorities did not want to accept black players. Thirdly, the segregation laws create artificial boundaries between people and prevent them from cooperating with each other for the overall benefit of the country. For these reasons, King argued that these laws should be abolished. He gave a call for peaceful and non-violent resistance against the segregation laws. He said in one of his speeches:  We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence.  country. So do infrastructure projects like road making. You may have come across workers from different regions near your home or school. However, often resistance builds up among the local people against so many jobs going to people from outside the area, sometimes at lower wages. A demand may develop to restrict certain jobs to those who belong to the state, or those who know the local language. Political parties may take up the issue. Resistance could even take the form of organised violence against  outsiders. Almost every region of India has experienced such movements. Are such movements ever justified? We all become indignant, if Indian workers in other countries are ill-treated by the local population. Some of us may also feel that skilled and educated workers have the right to migrate for work. States may even be proud of their ability to attract such workers. But if jobs are scarce in a region, local residents may resent competition from  outsiders. Does the right to freedom of movement include the right to live or work in any part of the country? Another factor that we need to consider is that there may sometimes be a difference between our response to poor migrants and to skilled migrants. We may not always be as welcoming to poor migrants who move into our areas as we may be to skilled and affluent workers. This raises the question of whether poor and unskilled workers should have the same right to live and work anywhere in the country as do skilled workers? These are some of the issues which are being debated in our country today regarding  full and equal membership  for all citizens of the country. However, disputes may sometimes arise even in democratic societies. How can such disputes be resolved? The right to protest is an aspect of the freedom of expression guaranteed to citizens in our Constitution, provided protest does not harm the life or property of other people or the State. Citizens are free to try and influence public opinion and government policy by forming groups, holding demonstrations, using the media, appealing to political parties, or by approaching the courts. The courts may give a decision on the matter, or they may urge the government to address the issue. It may be a slow process but varying degrees of success are sometimes possible. If the guiding principle of providing full and equal membership to all citizens is kept in mind, it should be possible to arrive at an acceptable solution to the problems that may arise from time to time in a society. A basic principle of democracy is that such disputes should be settled by negotiation and discussion rather than force. This is one of the obligations of citizenship. Examine the arguments for and against freedom of movement and occupation throughout the country for Should the long-term inhabitants of a region enjoy preference for jobs and facilities? Or, should states be allowed to fix quotas for admissions to professional colleges for students who do not belong to that state? 6.3 EQUAL RIGHTS In this section we will examine another aspect of citizenship, that is, the issue of whether full and equal membership means that all citizens, rich or poor, should be guaranteed certain basic rights and a minimum standard of living by the state. To discuss this issue, we will look at one set of people, that is the urban poor. Dealing with the problem of the poor in towns is one of the urgent problems facing the government today. There is a large population of slum-dwellers and squatters in every city in India. Although they may do necessary and useful work, often at low wages, they are often viewed as unwelcome visitors by the rest of the town population. They may be blamed for straining the resources of the city or for spreading crime and disease. The conditions in slums are often shocking. Many people may be crammed into small rooms with no private toilets, running water, or sanitation. Life and property are insecure in a slum. However, make a significant contribution to the their labour. They may be hawkers, weaving, or textile tailoring, may also develop in slums. The city probably little on providing services such as sanitation or water Awareness about the condition of the urban poor is growing among governments, N.G.O s and other agencies, and among the slum-dwellers themselves. For instance, a national policy on urban street vendors was framed in January 2004. There are lakhs of street vendors in big cities and they often face harassment from the police and town authorities. The policy was intended to provide recognition and regulation for vendors to enable them to carry on their profession without harassment so long as they obeyed Slum-dwellers also are becoming aware of their rights and are beginning to organise to demand them. They have sometimes even CITIZENSHIP, EQUALITY AND RIGHTS Citizenship is not merely a legal concept. It is also closely related to larger notions of equality and rights. A widely accepted formulation of this relationship was provided by the British sociologist, T. H. Marshall (1893-1981). In his book Citizenship and Social Class (1950), Marshall defined citizenship as  a status bestowed on those who are full members of a community. All who possess the status are equal with respect to the rights and duties with which the status is endowed.  The key concept in Marshall s idea of citizenship is that of  equality. This implies two things: first, that quality of the given rights and duties improves. Second, that the quantity of people upon whom they are Marshall sees citizenship as involving three kinds of rights: civil, political and social. Civil rights protect the individual s life, liberty and property. Political rights enable the individual to participate in the process of governance. Social rights give the individual access to education and employment. Together they make it possible for the citizen to lead a life of dignity. Marshall saw social class as a  system of inequality. Citizenship ensures equality by countering the divisive effects of class hierarchy. It thus facilitates the creation of a better-integrated and harmonious community. approached the courts. Even a basic political right like the right to vote may be difficult for them to exercise because to be included in the list of voters a fixed address is required and squatters and pavement dwellers may find it difficult to provide this. Among other groups of people who are becoming marginalised in our society are the tribal people and forest dwellers. These people are dependent on access to forests and other natural resources to maintain their way of life. Many of them face threats to their way of life and livelihood because of the pressure of increasing populations and the search for land and resources to maintain them. Pressures from commercial interests wanting to mine the resources which may exist in forests or coasts poses another threat to the way of life and livelihood of forest dwellers and tribal peoples, as does the tourist industry. Governments are struggling with the problem of how to protect these people and their habitat without at the same time endangering development of the country. This is an issue that affects all citizens, not just tribal people. To try and ensure equal rights and opportunities for all citizens cannot be a simple matter for any government. Different groups of people may have different needs and problems and the rights of one group may conflict with the rights of another. Equal rights for citizens need not mean that uniform policies have to be applied to all people since different groups of people may have different needs. If the purpose is not just to make policies which would apply in the same way to all people, but to make people more equal, the different needs and claims of people would have to be taken into account when framing policies. CITIZENSHIP, EQUALITY AND RIGHTS The Supreme Court gave an important decision regarding the rights of slum-dwellers in Bombay in response to a Public Interest Litigation filed by a social activist, Olga Tellis against Bombay Municipal Corporation in 1985. The petition claimed the right to live on pavements or in slums because there was no alternative accommodation available close to their place of work. If they were forced to move they would lose their livelihood as well. The Supreme Court said,  Article 21 of the Constitution which guaranteed the right to life included the right to livelihood. Therefore if pavement dwellers were to be evicted they should first be provided alternative accommodation under the right to shelter.  What should become clear from this discussion is that changes in the world situation, the economy, and society demand new interpretations of the meaning and rights of citizenship. The formal laws regarding citizenship only form the starting point and the interpretation of laws is constantly evolving. While answers to some the problems which may arise may not be easy to find, the concept of equal citizenship would mean that providing equal rights and protection to all citizens should be one of the guiding principles of government policies. LET S DO IT D Survey three families of workers working close to, or in, your homes or school. Find out details about their life. Where is their ancestral place? When and why did they come here?  Where do they live? How many people share the a c c o m m o d a t i o n ? What kinds of facilities are available to them? Do their children According to the official figures published about the land distribution in Zimbabwe, some 4,400 white families owned 32 per cent of agricultural land that is about 10m hectares. About one million black peasant families own just 16m hectares that is the 38 per cent of the land.  While the land that is with the white families is fertile and irrigated, the land in the hands of black population is less fertile and unirrigated. While tracing the history of land ownership, it is very obvious that a century ago the whites had taken the fertile land from the native people. Whites have now been in Zimbabwe for generations and consider themselves as Zimbabweans. The total population of whites in Zimbabwe is just 0.06 per cent of the population.  In the year 1997, the President of Zimbabwe, Mugabe announced the plans to take over around What ideas from citizenship would you use to support or oppose the claims of Black and White Citizens of LET S DO IT D Find out about the street vendors 6.4 CITIZEN AND NATION The concept of nation state evolved in the modern period. One of the earliest assertions regarding the sovereignty of the nation state and democratic rights of citizens was made by the revolutionaries in France in 1789. Nation states claim that their boundaries define not just a territory but also a unique culture and shared history. The national identity may be expressed through symbols like a flag, national anthem, national language, or certain ceremonial practices, among other things. Most modern states include people of different religions, languages, and cultural traditions. But the national identity of a democratic state is supposed to provide citizens with a political identity that can be shared by all the members of the state. Democratic states usually try to define their identity so that it is as inclusive as possible   that is, which allows all citizens to identify themselves as part of the nation. But in practice, most countries tend to define their identity in a way which makes it easier for some citizens to identify with the state than others. It may also make it easier for the state to extend citizenship to some people and not others. This would be as true of the United States, which prides itself on being a country of immigrants, as any other country. France, for instance, is a country which claims to be both secular and inclusive. It includes not only people of European origin but also citizens who originally came from other areas such as North Africa. Culture and language are important features of its national identity and all citizens are expected to assimilate into it in the public aspects of their lives. They may, however, retain their personal beliefs and practices in their private lives. This may seem like a reasonable policy but it is not always simple to define what is public and what is private and this has given rise to some controversies. Religious belief is supposed to belong to the private sphere of citizens but sometimes religious symbols and practices may enter into their public lives. You may have heard about the demand of Sikh school boys in France to wear the turban to school, and of Muslim girls to wear the head scarf with their school uniforms. This was disallowed by some schools on the ground that it involved bringing religious symbols into the public sphere of state education. Those whose religions did not demand such practices naturally did not face the same problem. Clearly, assimilation into the national culture would be easier for some groups than for others. The criteria for granting citizenship to new applicants varies from country to country. In countries such as Israel, or Germany, factors like religion, or ethnic origin, may be given priority when granting citizenship. In Germany there has been a persistent demand from Turkish workers, who were at one time encouraged to come and work in Germany, that their children who have been born and brought up in Germany should automatically be granted citizenship. This is still being debated. These are only a few examples of the kinds of restrictions which may be placed on citizenship even in democratic countries which pride themselves on being inclusive. India defines itself as a secular, democratic, nation state. The movement for independence was a broad based one and deliberate attempts were made to bind together people of different religions, regions and cultures. True, Partition of the country did take place in 1947 when differences with the Muslim League could not be resolved, but this only strengthened the resolve of Indian national leaders to maintain the secular and inclusive character of the Indian nation state they were committed to build. This resolve was embodied in the Constitution. The Indian Constitution attempted to accommodate a very diverse society. To mention just a few of these diversities, it attempted to provide full and equal citizenship to groups as different as the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, many women who had not previously enjoyed equal rights, some remote communities in the Andaman and Nicobar islands who had had little contact with modern civilization, and many others. It also attempted to find a place for the different languages, religions and practices found in different parts of the country. It had to provide equal rights to all without at the same time forcing people to give up their personal beliefs, languages or cultural practices. It was therefore a unique experiment which was undertaken through the Constitution. The Republic Day parade in Delhi symbolises the attempt of the state to include people of different regions, cultures and religions. The provisions about citizenship in the Constitution can be found in Part Two and in subsequent laws passed by Parliament. The Constitution adopted an essentially democratic and inclusive notion of citizenship. In India, citizenship can be acquired by birth, descent, registration, naturalisation, or inclusion of territory. The rights and obligations of citizens are listed in the Constitution. There is also a provision that the state should not discriminate against citizens on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth, or any of them. The rights of religious and linguistic minorities are also protected. However, even such inclusive provisions have given rise to struggles and controversies. The women s movement, the dalit movement, or struggles of people displaced by development projects, represent only a few of the struggles being waged by people who feel that they are being denied full rights of citizenship. The experience of India indicates that democratic citizenship in any country is a project, an ideal to work towards. New issues are constantly being raised as societies change and new demands are made by groups who feel they are being marginalised. In a democratic state these demands have to be negotiated. 6.5 UNIVERSAL CITIZENSHIP When we think of refugees, or illegal migrants, many images may come to mind. One may be of people from Asia or Africa who have paid agents to smuggle them into Europe or America. The risks are high but they seem willing to make the effort. Another image may be of people displaced by war or famine. Such images are often shown on the television. Refugees in the Darfur region of Sudan, Palestinians, Burmese or Bangladeshis, the examples are many. All these are people who have been forced to become refugees in their own, or neighbouring countries. It is not appropriate for schools, or any other public agencies like the army, to insist on a common uniform and to ban the display of religious symbols such as the turban. We often assume that full membership of a state should be available to all those who ordinarily live and work in the country as well as to those who apply for citizenship. But although many states may support the idea of universal and inclusive citizenship, each of them also fixes criteria for the grant of citizenship. These would generally be written into the Constitution and laws of the country. States use their power to keep unwanted visitors out. However, in spite of restrictions, even the building of walls or fences, considerable migration of peoples still takes place in the world. People may be displaced by wars, or persecution, famine, or other reasons. If no state is willing to accept them and they cannot return home, they become stateless peoples or refugees. They may be forced to live in camps, or as illegal migrants. Often they cannot legally work, or educate their children, or acquire property. The problem is so great that the U.N. has appointed a High Commissioner for Refugees to try to help them. Decisions regarding how many people can be absorbed as citizens in a country poses a difficult humanitarian and political problem for many states. Many countries have a policy of accepting those fleeing from persecution or war. But they may not want to accept unmanageable number of people or expose the country to security risks. India prides itself on providing refuge to persecuted peoples, as it did with the Dalai Lama and his followers in 1959. Entry of people from neighbouring countries has taken place along all the borders of the Indian state and the process continues. Many of these people remain as stateless peoples for many years or generations, living in camps, or as illegal migrants. Only a relatively few of them are eventually granted citizenship. Such problems pose a challenge to the promise of democratic citizenship which is that the rights and identity of citizen would be available to all people in the contemporary world. Although many people cannot achieve citizenship of a state of their choice, no alternative identity exists for them. The problem of stateless people is an important one confronting the world today. Borders of states are still being redefined by war or political disputes and for the people caught up in such disputes the consequences may be severe. They may lose their homes, political identities, and security, and be forced to migrate. Can citizenship provide a solution to the problems of such people? If not, what kind of alternative identity can be provided today? Do we need to try and evolve a more genuinely universal identity than national citizenship? Suggestions for a notion of global citizenship are sometimes put forward. The possibilities will be discussed in the next section. 6.6 GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP Consider the following statements: There was an outpouring of sympathy and help for the victims of the tsunami which affected a number of countries in South Asia International networks link terrorists today. The United Nations is working with different states to try and prevent the spread of bird flu and the possible emergence of a human viral pandemic. What is common to the statements given above? What do they tell us about the world in which we live today? We live today in an interconnected world. New means of communication such as the internet, and television, and cell phones, have brought a major change in the way in which we understand our world. In the past it might have taken months for news about developments in one part of the world to become known in other parts. But new modes of communication have put us into immediate contact with developments in different parts of the globe. We can watch disasters and wars on our television screens as they are taking place. This has helped to develop sympathies and shared concerns among people in different countries of the world. Supporters of global citizenship argue that although a world community and global society does not yet exist, people already feel List some of the stateless people living in India today. Write a short note on any of LET S DO IT D linked to each other across national boundaries. They would say that the outpouring of help from all parts of the world for victims of the Asian tsunami and other major calamities is a sign of the emergence of a global society. They feel that we should try to strengthen this feeling and work towards a concept of global citizenship. The concept of national citizenship assumes that our state can provide us with the protection and rights which we need to live with dignity in the world today. But states today are faced with many problems which they cannot tackle by themselves. In this situation are individual rights, guaranteed by the state, sufficient to protect the freedom of people today? Or has the time come to move to a concept of human rights and global citizenship? One of the attractions of the notion of global citizenship is that it might make it easier to deal with problems which extend across national boundaries and which therefore need cooperative action by the people and governments of many states. For instance, it might make it easier to find an acceptable solution to the issue of migrants and stateless peoples, or at least to ensure them basic rights and protection regardless of the country in which they may In the previous section, we saw that equal citizenship within a country can be threatened by the socio-economic inequalities or other problems which might exist. Such problems can ultimately only be solved by the governments and people of that particular society. Therefore, full and equal membership of a state remains important for people today. But the concept of global citizenship reminds us that national citizenship might need to be supplemented by an awareness that we live in an interconnected world and that there is also a need for us to strengthen our links with people in different parts of the world and be ready to work with people and governments across national boundaries. Find out about Global (GCED) from https:// /gced and https:// w w w. g c e d c l e a r i n g LET S DO IT D Citizenship as full and equal membership of a political community involves both rights and obligations. Which rights could citizens expect to enjoy in most democratic state today? What kind of obligation will they have to their state and fellow citizens? All citizens may be granted equal rights but all may not be able to equally exercise them. Explain. Write a short note on any two struggles for full enjoyment of citizen rights which have taken place in India in recent years. Which rights were being claimed in each case? What are some of the problems faced by refugees? In what ways could the concept of global citizenship benefit them? Migration of people to different regions within the country is often resisted by the local inhabitants. What are some of the contributions that the migrants could make to the local economy?  Democratic citizenship is a project rather than an accomplished fact even in countries like India which grant equal citizenship.  Discuss some of the issues regarding citizenship being raised in India today. Credit: Image on opening page: Shweta Rao This chapter will introduce and discuss the ideas of nationalism and nation. Our concern will be not so much to understand why nationalism has arisen, or what functions it serves; rather our concern would be to think carefully about nationalism and assess its claims and aspirations. After studying this chapter you should be understand the concepts of nation and nationalism. acknowledge the strengths and limitations of nationalism. appreciate the need for ensuring a link between democracy and nationalism. 7.1 INTRODUCING NATIONALISM If we were to take a quick poll of what people commonly understand by the term nationalism we are likely to get responses which talk about patriotism, national flags, sacrificing for the country, and the like. The Republic Day parade in Delhi is a striking symbol of Indian nationalism and it brings out the sense of power, strength, as well as diversity which many associate with the Indian nation. But if we try to go deeper we will find that it is difficult to arrive at a precise and widely accepted definition of the term nationalism. This need not mean that we should abandon the effort.  Nationalism needs to be studied because it plays such an important role in world affairs. During the last two centuries or more, nationalism has emerged as one of the most compelling of political creeds which has helped to shape history. It has inspired intense loyalties as well as deep hatreds. It has united people as well as divided them, helped to liberate them from oppressive rule as well as been the cause of conflict and bitterness and wars. It has been a factor in the break up of empires and states. Nationalist struggles have contributed to the drawing and redrawing of the boundaries of states and empires. At present a large part of the world is divided into different nation-states although the process of re-ordering of state boundaries has not come to an end and separatist struggles within existing states are common. Nationalism has passed through many phases. For instance, in the nineteenth century Europe, it led to the unification of a number of small kingdoms into larger nation-states. The present day German and Italian states were formed through such a process of unification and consolidation. A large number of new states were also founded in Latin America. Along with the consolidation of state boundaries, local dialects and local loyalties were also gradually consolidated into state loyalties and common languages. The people of the new states acquired a new political identity which was based on membership of the nation-state. We have seen a similar process of consolidation taking place in our own country in the last century or more. But nationalism also accompanied and contributed to the break up of large empires such as the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires in the early twentieth century in Europe as well as the break-up of the British, French, Dutch and Portuguese empires in Asia and Africa. The struggle for freedom from colonial rule by India and other former colonies were nationalist struggles, inspired by the desire to establish nation-states which would be independent of The process of redrawing state boundaries continues to take place. Since 1960, even apparently stable nation-states have been confronted by nationalist demands put forward by groups or regions and these may include demands for separate statehood. Today, in many parts of the world we witness nationalist struggles that threaten to divide existing states. Such separatist movements have developed among the Quebecois in Canada, the Basques in northern Spain, the Kurds in Turkey and Iraq, and the Tamils in Sri Lanka, among others. The language of nationalism is also used by some groups in India. Arab nationalism today may hope to unite Arab countries in a pan Arab union but separatist movements like the Basques or Kurds struggle to divide existing states. We may all agree that nationalism is a powerful force in the world even today. But it is more difficult to arrive at agreement regarding the definition of terms like nation or nationalism. What is a nation? Why do people form nations and to what do nations aspire? Why are people ready to sacrifice and even die for their nation? Why, and in what way, are claims to nationhood linked to claims to statehood? Do nations have a right to statehood or national self-determination? Or can the claims of nationalism be met without conceding separate statehood? In this chapter we will explore some of these issues. In this age of globalisation, the world is shrinking. We are living in a global village. Nations are irrelevant. That s not the case. Nationalism is still relevant.  You can see this when Indian team goes out to play cricket. Or when you discover that Indians living abroad still watch Bollywood films. 7.2  NATIONS AND NATIONALISM A nation is not any casual collection of people. At the same time it is also different from other groups or communities found in human society. It is different from the family which is based on face-to-face relationships with each member having direct personal knowledge of the identity and character of others. It is also different from tribes and clans and other kinship groups in which ties of marriage and descent link members to each other so that even if we do not personally know all the members we can, if need be, trace the links that bind them to us. But as a member of a nation we may never come face to face with most of our fellow nationals nor need we share ties of descent with them. Yet nations exist, are lived in and valued by their members. It is commonly believed that nations are constituted by a group who share certain features such as descent, or language, or religion or ethnicity. But there is in fact no common set of characteristics which is present in all nations. Many nations do not have a common language, Canada is an example here. Canada includes English speaking as well as French speaking peoples. India also has a large number of languages which are spoken in different regions and by different communities. Nor do many nations have a common religion to unite them. The characteristics such as race or descent. What then constitutes a nation? A nation is to a great extent an  imagined  community, held together by the collective beliefs, aspirations and imaginations of its members. It is based on certain assumptions which people make about the collective whole with which they identify. Let us identify and understand some of the assumptions which people make about the nation. Identify any patriotic song in your language. How is the nation described in this song? Identify and watch any patriotic films in your language. How has nationalism been portrayed and its out in these films? LET S DO IT D First, a nation is constituted by belief. Nations are not like mountains, rivers or buildings which we can see and feel. They are not things which exist independent of the beliefs that people have about them. To speak of a people as a nation is not to make a comment about their physical characteristics or behaviour. Rather, it is to refer to the collective identity and vision for the future of a group which aspires to have an independent political existence. To this extent, nations can be compared with a team. When we speak of a team, we mean a set of people who work or play together and, more importantly, conceive of themselves as a collective group. If they did not think of themselves in this way they would cease to be a team and be simply different individuals playing a game or undertaking a task. A nation exists when its members believe that they belong together. Why dont you cheer for our team? Dont you have any nationalist spirit? I am as much a nationalist as anyone else. I cast my vote; I pay my taxes and I respect the laws of our country. I am also proud to belong to this country. Second, people who see themselves as a nation also embody a sense of continuing historical identity. That is, nations perceive themselves as stretching back into the past as well as reaching into the future. They articulate for themselves a sense of their own history by drawing on collective memories, legends, historical records, to outline the continuing identity of the nation. Thus nationalists in India invoked its ancient civilisation and cultural heritage and other achievements to claim that India has had a long and continuing history as a civilisation and that this civilisational continuity and unity is the basis of the Indian nation. Jawaharlal Nehru, for instance, wrote in his book The Discovery of India,  Though outwardly there was diversity and infinite variety among the people, everywhere there was that tremendous impress of oneness, which held all of us together in ages past, whatever political fate or misfortune had befallen us. Third, nations identify with a particular territory. Sharing a common past and living together on a particular territory over a long period of time gives people a sense of their collective identity. It helps them to imagine themselves as one people. It is therefore not surprising that people who see themselves as a nation speak of a homeland. The territory they occupied and the land on which they have lived has a special significance for them, and they claim it as their own. Nations however characterise the homeland in different ways, for instance as motherland, or fatherland, or holy land. The Jewish people for instance, in spite of being dispersed and scattered in different parts of the world always claimed that their original homeland was in Palestine, the  promised land. The Indian nation identifies with the rivers, mountains and regions of the Indian subcontinent. However, since more than one set of people may lay claim to the same territory, the aspiration for a homeland has been a major cause of conflict in the world. Shared Political Ideals Fourth, while territory and shared historical identity play an important role in creating a sense of oneness, it is a shared vision of the future and the collective aspiration to have an independent political existence that distinguishes groups from nations. Members of a nation share a vision of the kind of state they want to build. They affirm among other things a set of values and principles such as democracy, secularism and liberalism. These ideals represent the terms under which they come together and are willing to live together. It represents, in other words, their political identity as a nation. In a democracy, it is shared commitment to a set of political values and ideals that is the most desirable basis of a political community or a nation-state. Within it, members of political community are bound by a set of obligations. These obligations arise from the recognition of the rights of each other as citizens. A nation is strengthened when its people acknowledge and accept their obligations to their fellow members. We might even say that recognition of this framework of obligations is the strongest test of loyalty to the nation. Common Political Identity Many people believe that a shared political vision about the state and society we wish to create is not enough to bind individuals together as a nation. They seek instead a shared cultural identity, such as a common language, or common descent. There is no doubt that speaking the same language makes it easier for us to communicate with each other and sharing the same religion gives us a set of common beliefs and social practices. Observing the same festivals, seeking the same holidays, and holding the same symbols valuable can bring people together, but it can also pose a threat to the values that we cherish in a democracy. There are two reasons for this. One, all major religions in the world are internally diverse. They have survived and evolved through a dialogue within the community. As a result there exists within each religion a number of sects who differ significantly in their interpretation of the religious texts and norms. If we ignore these differences and forge an identity on the basis of a common religion we are likely to create a highly authoritative and oppressive society. Two, most societies are culturally diverse. They have people belonging to different religions and languages living together in the same territory. To impose a single religious or linguistic identity as a condition of belonging to a particular state would necessarily exclude some groups. It might restrict the religious liberty of the excluded group or disadvantage those who do not speak the national language. Either way, the ideal that we cherish most in democracy   namely, equal treatment and liberty for all   would be severely limited.  For both these reasons it is desirable to imagine the nation in political rather than cultural terms. That is, democracies need to emphasise and expect loyalty to a set of values that may be enshrined in the Constitution of the country rather than adherence to a particular religion, race or language. We have identified above some of the ways in which nations express their sense of collective identity. We have also seen why democratic states need to forge this identity on the basis of shared political ideals.  But we are still left with an important question, namely, why do people imagine themselves as a nation? What are some of the aspirations of different nations? In the next two sections we shall try to address these questions. 7.3 NATIONAL SELF-DETERMINATION Nations, unlike other social groups, seek the right to govern themselves and determine their future development. They seek, in other words, the right to self-determination. In making this claim a nation seeks recognition and acceptance by the international community of its status as a distinct political entity or state. Most often these claims come from people who have lived together on a given land for a long period of time and who have a sense of common identity. In some cases such claims to self-determination are linked also to the desire to form a state in which the culture of the group is protected if not privileged. Claims of the latter kind were frequently made in the nineteenth century in Europe. The notion of one culture - one state began to gain acceptability at the time. Subsequently, the idea of one culture- one state was employed while reordering state boundaries after World War I. The Treaty of Versailles established a number of small, newly independent states, but it proved virtually impossible to satisfy all the demands for self determination which were made at the time. Besides, re-organisation of state boundaries to satisfy the demands of one culture - one state, led to mass migration of population across state boundaries. Millions of people as a consequence were displaced from their homes and expelled from the land which had been their home for generations. Many others became victims of communal violence. Humanity paid a heavy price for re-organising boundaries in a way that culturally distinct communities could form separate nation-states. Besides, even in this effort it was not possible to ensure that the newly created states contained only one ethnic community. DEMAND FOR NATIONAL SELF-DETERMINATION IN BASQUE Demands for national been raised in different parts of the World. Let us look at one Basque is a hilly and prosperous region in Spain. This region is Spanish government as an  autonomous  region within the Spanish federation. But the leaders of Basque Nationalist Movement are not satisfied with this autonomy. They want this region to become a separate country. Supporters of this movement have used constitutional and, till recently, violent means to press for this demand. Basque Nationalists say that their culture is very different from the Spanish culture. They have their own language that does not resemble Spanish at all. Only one-third of the people in Basque understand that language today. The hilly terrain makes the Basque region geographically distinct from the rest of the Spain. Ever since the Roman days, the Basque region never surrendered its autonomy to the Spanish rulers. Its systems of justice, administration and finance were governed by its own unique arrangements. The modern Basque Nationalist Movement started when, around the end of nineteenth century, the Spanish rulers tried to abolish this unique political- administrative arrangement. In the twentieth century, the Spanish dictator Franco further cut down this autonomy. He went as far as to ban the use of Basque language in public places and even homes. These repressive measures have now been withdrawn. But the leaders of Basque movement continue to be suspicious of the motives of the Spanish government and fearful of the entry of  outsiders  in their region. Their opponents say that Basque separatists are trying to make political gains out of an issue already resolved. Do you think Basque nationalists are justified in demanding a separate nation? Is Basque a nation? What more would you like to know before you can answer this question? Can you think of similar examples from different parts of the world?  Can you think of regions and groups in our country where such demands have been made? Source: Multiple Resources including www.en.wikipedia.org Indeed most states had more than one ethnic and cultural community living within its boundaries. These communities, which were often small in number and constituted a minority within the state were often disadvantaged. Hence, the problem of accommodating minorities as equal citizens remained. The only positive aspect of these developments was that it granted political recognition to various groups who saw themselves as distinct nations and wanted the opportunity to govern themselves and determined their own future. The right to national self-determination has also been asserted by national liberation movements in Asia and Africa when they were struggling against colonial domination. Nationalist movements maintained that political independence would provide dignity and recognition to the colonised people and also help them to protect the collective interests of their people. Most national liberation movements were inspired by the goal of bringing justice and rights and prosperity to the nation. However, here also, it proved almost impossible to ensure that each cultural group, some of whom claimed to be distinct nations, could achieve political independence and statehood. As a result, migration of populations, border wars, and violence have continued to plague many countries in the region. Thus we have the paradoxical situation of nation-states which themselves had achieved independence through struggle now acting against minorities within their own territories who claim the right to national self- determination. Virtually every state in the world today faces the dilemma of how to deal with movements for self-determination and this has raised questions about the right to national self-determination. More and more people are beginning to realise that the solution does not lie in creating new states but in making existing states more democratic and equal. That is, in ensuring that people with different cultural and ethnic identities live and co-exist as partners and equal citizens within the country. This may be essential not only for resolving problems arising from new claims for self-determination but also for building a strong and united state. After all, a nation-state which does not respect the rights and cultural identity of minorities within the state would find it difficult to gain the loyalty of its members. 7.4 NATIONALISM AND PLURALISM Once we abandon the idea of one-culture-one- state, it becomes necessary to consider ways by which different cultures and communities can survive and flourish within a country. It is in pursuit of this goal that many democratic societies today have introduced measures for recognising and protecting the identity of cultural minority communities living within their territory. The Indian constitution has an elaborate set of provisions for the protection of religious, linguistic and cultural minorities. The kinds of group rights which have been granted in different countries include constitutional protection for the language, cultures and religion, of minority groups and their members. In some cases identified communities also have the right to representation as a group in legislative bodies and other state institutions. Such rights may be justified on the grounds that they provide equal treatment and protection of the law for members of these groups as well as protection for the cultural identity of the group. Different groups need to be granted recognition as a part of the national community. This means that the national identity has to be defined in an inclusive manner which can recognise the importance and unique contribution of all the cultural communities within the state. Although it is hoped that granting groups recognition and protection would satisfy their aspirations, some groups may continue to demand separate statehood. This may seem paradoxical when globalisation is also spreading in the world but nationalist aspirations continue to motivate many groups and communities. Cut out clippings from various newspapers and magazines related to the demands of various groups in India and abroad for the right to an opinion about the What are the reasons behind these demands? What strategies have What do you think could be the possible LET S DO IT D TAGORE S CRITIQUE OF NATIONALISM spiritual shelter; my refuge is humanity. I will not buy glass for the price of diamonds, and I will never allow humanity as long as This was said by Rabindranath Tagore. He was against colonial rule and asserted India s right to independence. He felt that in the British administration of the colonies, there was no place for  upholding of dignity of human relationships,  an idea which was otherwise cherished in the British civilisation. Tagore made a distinction between opposing western imperialism and rejecting western civilisation. While Indians should be rooted in their own culture and heritage, they should not resist learning freely and profitably from abroad. A critique of what he called  patriotism  is a persistent theme in his writings. He was very critical of the narrow expressions of nationalism that he found at work in parts of our independence movement. In particular, he was afraid that a rejection of the west in favour of what looked like Indian traditions was not only limiting in itself; it could easily turn into hostility to other influences from abroad, including Christianity, Judaism, Zoroastrianism and Islam which have been present in our Considerable generosity and skill is needed for countries to be able to deal with such demands in a democratic manner. To sum up, the right to national self-determination was often understood to include the right to independent statehood for nationalities. But not only would it be impossible to grant independent statehood to every group that sees itself as a distinct cultural group, or nation, it would probably also be undesirable. It might lead to the formation of a number of states too small to be economically and politically viable and it could multiply the problems of minorities. The right has now been reinterpreted to mean granting certain democratic rights for a nationality within a state. The world we live in is one that is deeply conscious of the importance of giving recognition to identities. Today we witness many struggles for the recognition of group identities, many of which employ the language of nationalism. While we need to acknowledge the claims of identity, we should be careful not to allow identity claims to lead to divisions and violence in the society. We need to remember that each person has many identities. For instance, a person may have identities based on gender, caste, religion, language, or region, and may be proud of all of them. So long as each person feels that he/she can freely express the different dimensions of his/her  personality, they may not feel the need to make claims on the state for political recognition and concessions for any one identity. In a democracy the political identity of citizen should encompass the different identities which people may have. It would be dangerous if intolerant and homogenising forms of identity and nationalism are allowed to develop. How is a nation different from other forms of collective belonging? What do you understand by the right to national self-determination? How has this idea resulted in both formation of and challenges to  We have seen that nationalism can unite people as well as divide them, liberate them as well as generate bitterness and conflict. Illustrate your answer with examples. Neither descent, nor language, nor religion or ethnicity can claim to be a common factor in nationalisms all over the world. Comment. Illustrate with suitable examples the factors that lead to the emergence of nationalist feelings. How is a democracy more effective than authoritarian governments in dealing with conflicting nationalist aspirations? What do you think are the limitations of nationalism? Credit: Image on opening page: Shweta Rao When different cultures and communities exist within the same country, how should a democratic state ensure equality for each of them? This is the question that emerged in the previous chapter. In this chapter we will try and see how the concept of secularism may be applied to answer that concern. In India, the idea of secularism is ever present in public debates and discussions, yet there is something very perplexing about the state of secularism in India.  On the one hand, almost every politician swears by it.  Every political party professes to be secular.  On the other hand, all kinds of anxieties and doubts beset secularism in India.  Secularism is challenged not only by clerics and religious nationalists but by some politicians, social activists and even academics. In this chapter we will engage in this ongoing debate by asking the following  questions: What is the meaning of secularism? Is secularism a western implant on Indian soil? Is it suitable for societies where religion continues to exercise a strong influence on Does secularism show partiality? Does it  pamper  minorities? Is secularism anti-religious? At the end of this chapter you should be able to understand and appreciate the importance of secularism in a democratic society like India, and learn something about the distinctiveness of Indian secularism. 8.1 WHAT IS SECULARISM? Though Jews faced discrimination for centuries throughout Europe, in the present state of Israel, Arab minorities, both Christian and Muslims, are excluded from social, political and economic benefits available to Jewish citizens.  Subtle forms of discrimination also continue to persist against non-Christians in several parts of Europe.  The condition of religious minorities in the neighbouring states of Pakistan and Bangladesh has also generated considerable concern.  Such examples remind us of the continuing importance of secularism for people and societies in today s world. In our own country, the Constitution declares that every Indian citizen has a right to live with freedom and dignity in any part of the country. et in reality, many forms of exclusion and discrimination continue to persist. Consider three most stark examples: More than 2,700 Sikhs were massacred in Delhi and many other parts of the country in 1984. The families of the victims feel that the guilty were not punished. Several thousands of Hindu Kashmiri pandits have been forced to leave their homes in the Kashmir valley; they have not been able to return to their homes for more than two decades. More than 1,000 persons were killed during the post-Godhra riots in Gujarat in 2002. The surviving members of many of these  families could not go back to the villages in which they What do these examples have in common? They all have to do with discrimination in one form or the other. In each case members of one community are targeted and victimised on account of their religious identity. In other words, basic freedoms of a set of citizens are denied. Some might even say that these incidents are instances of religious persecution and they reflect inter Secularism is first and foremost a doctrine that opposes all such forms of inter -religious domination. This is however only one crucial aspect of the concept of secularism. An equally important dimension of secularism is its opposition to intra-religious domination. Let  us get deeper into this issue. Some people believe that religion is merely the  opium of the masses  and that, one day, when the basic needs of all are fulfilled and they lead a happy and contented life, religion will disappear.  Such a view comes from an exaggerated sense of human potential.  It is unlikely that human beings will ever be able to fully know the world and control it. We may be able to prolong our life but will never become immortal.  Disease can never be entirely eliminated, nor can we get rid of an element of accident and luck from our lives. Separation and loss are endemic to the human condition. While a large part of our suffering is man-made and hence eliminable, at least some of our suffering is not made by man.  Religion, art and philosophy are responses to such sufferings. Secularism too accepts this and therefore it is not anti-religious. However, religion has its share of some deep-rooted problems. For example, one can hardly think of a religion that treats its male and female members on an equal footing.  In religions such as Hinduism, some sections have faced persistent discrimination. For example dalits have been barred from entering Hindu temples. In some parts of the country, Hindu woman cannot enter temples. When religion is organised, it is frequently taken over by its most conservative faction, which does not tolerate any dissent. Religious fundamentalism in parts of the US has become a big problem and endangers peace both within the country and outside. Many religions fragment into sects which leads to frequent sectarian violence and persecution of dissenting minorities. Thus religious domination cannot be identified only with inter- religious domination.  It takes another conspicuous form, namely, intra-religious domination. As secularism is opposed to all forms of institutionalised religious domination, it challenges  not merely inter- religious but also intra-religious domination. We now possess a general idea of secularism. It is a normative doctrine which seeks to realise a secular society, i.e., one devoid of either inter-religious or intra-religious domination.  Put positively, it promotes freedom within religions, and equality between, as well as within, religions. Within this larger framework, let us now consider a narrower and more specific question, namely: What kind of state is necessary to  realise these goals? In other words, let us consider how a state committed to the ideal of secularism should relate to religion and religious communities. 8.2 SECULAR STATE Perhaps one way of preventing religious discrimination is to work together for mutual enlightenment.  Education is one way of helping to change the mindset of people.  Individual examples of sharing and mutual help can  also contribute towards reducing prejudice and suspicion between communities. It is always inspiring to read stories of Hindus saving Muslims or Muslims saving Hindus in the midst of a deadly communal riot.  But it is unlikely that mere education or the goodness of some persons will eliminate religious discrimination.  In modern societies, states have enormous public power.  How they function is bound to make a crucial difference to the outcome of any struggle to create a society less ridden with inter-community conflict and religious discrimination. For this reason, we need to see what kind of state is needed to prevent religious conflict and to promote religious harmony. How should a state prevent domination by any religious group? For a start, a state must not be run by the heads of any particular religion. A state governed directly by a priestly order is called theocratic. Theocratic states, such as the Papal states of Europe in medieval times or in recent times the Taliban-controlled state, lacking separation between religious and political institutions, are known for their hierarchies, and oppressions, and reluctance to allow freedom of religion to members of other religious groups.  If we value peace, freedom and equality, religious institutions and state institutions must be separated. Some people think that the separation of state and religion is sufficient for the existence of a secular state.  This does not appear List some of the ways in which you feel communal harmony could be LET S DO IT D to be so.  Many states which are non-theocratic continue to have a close alliance with a particular religion.  For example, the state in England in the sixteenth century was not run by a priestly class but clearly favoured the Anglican Church and its members.  England had an  established Anglican religion, which was the official religion of the state.  Today Pakistan has an official state religion, namely Sunni Islam.  Such regimes may leave little scope for internal dissent or religious equality. To be truly secular, a state must not only refuse to be theocratic but also have no formal, legal alliance with any religion.  The separation of religion-state is, however, a necessary but not a sufficient ingredient of a secular state. A secular state must be committed to principles and goals which are at least partly derived from non-religious sources. These ends should include peace, religious freedom, freedom from religiously grounded oppression, discrimination and exclusion, as also inter-religious and intra-religious equality. To promote these ends the state must be separated from organised religion and its institutions for the sake of some of these values. However,  there is no reason to suggest that this separation should take a particular form. In fact  the nature and extent of separation may take different forms, depending upon the specific values it is meant to promote and the way in which  these values are spelt out. We will now  consider two such conceptions: the mainstream western conception best represented by the American state, and an alternative conception best exemplified by the Indian state. 8.3 THE WESTERN MODEL OF SECULARISM All secular states have one thing in common: they are neither theocratic nor do they establish a religion. However, in most commonly prevalent conceptions, inspired mainly by the American model, separation of religion and state is understood as mutual exclusion: the state will not intervene in the affairs of religion and, in the same manner, religion will not interfere in the affairs of the state.  Each Learning more about other religions is the learning to respect and accept other people and their beliefs. But that need not mean that we should not be able to stand up for what we feel are basic human has a separate sphere of its own with independent jurisdiction.  No policy of the state can have an exclusively religious rationale.  No religious classification can be the basis of any public policy.  If this happened there is illegitimate intrusion of religion in the state. Similarly, the state cannot aid any religious institution.  It cannot give financial support to educational institutions run by religious communities. Nor can it hinder the activities of religious communities, as long as they are within the broad limits set by the law of the land. For example, if a religious institution forbids a woman from becoming a priest, then the state can do little about it.  If a religious community excommunicates its dissenters, the state can only be a silent witness. If a particular religion forbids the entry of some of its members in the sanctum of its temple, then the state has no option but to let the matter rest exactly where it is.  On this view, religion is a private matter, not a matter of state policy or law. This common conception interprets freedom and equality in an individualist manner.  Liberty is the liberty of individuals.  Equality Let us look at a very different kind of secularism practised in Turkey in the first half of the twentieth century. This secularism was not about principled distance from organised religion, instead it involved, active intervention in and suppression of, religion. This version of secularism was propounded and practised by Mustafa He came to power after the First World War. He was determined to put an end to the institution of Khalifa in the public life of Turkey. Ataturk was convinced that only a clear break with traditional thinking and expressions could elevate Turkey from the sorry state it was in. He set out in an aggressive manner to modernise and secularise Turkey. Ataturk changed his own name from Mustafa Kemal Pasha to Kemal Ataturk (Ataturk translates as Father of the Turks). The Fez, a traditional cap worn by Muslims, was banned by the Hat Law. Western clothing was encouraged for men and women. The Western (Gregorian) calendar replaced the traditional Turkish calendar. In 1928, the new Turkish alphabet (in a modified Latin form) was adopted. Can you imagine a secularism that does not give you the freedom to keep the name you are identified with, wear the dress you are used to, change the language you communicate in? In what ways do you think Ataturk s secularism is different from Indian secularism ? KEMAL ATATURK S SECULARISM is equality between individuals.  There is no scope for the idea that a community has the liberty to follow practices of its own choosing. There is little scope for community-based rights or minority rights. The history of western societies tells us why this is so.  Except for the presence of the Jews, most western societies were marked by a great deal of religious homogeneity. Given this fact, they naturally focused on intra- religious domination. While strict separation of the state from the church is emphasised to realise among other things, individual freedom, issues of -religious (and therefore of minority rights) equality are mainstream secularism has no place for the idea of state- supported religious reform.  This feature follows directly from its separation of state from church/ religion entails  a relationship of THE INDIAN MODEL Sometimes it is said that Indian secularism is an imitation of western secularism. But a Constitution shows that this is not the case. Indian secularism is fundamentally different from Western secularism. NEHRU ON SECULARISM   Equal protection by the State to all religions. This is how Nehru responded when a student asked him to spell out what secularism meant in independent India. He wanted a secular state to be one that  protects all religions, but does not favour one at the expense of others and does not itself adopt any religion as the state religion. Nehru was the philosopher of Indian secularism. Nehru did not practise any religion, nor did he believe in God. But for him secularism did not mean hostility to religion. In that sense Nehru was very different from Ataturk in Turkey. At the same time Nehru was not in favour of a complete separation between religion and state. A secular state can interfere in matters of religion to bring about social reform. Nehru himself played a key role in enacting laws abolishing caste discrimination, dowry and sati, and extending legal rights and social freedom to Indian women. While Nehru was prepared to be flexible on many counts, there was one thing on which he was always firm and uncompromising. Secularism for him meant a complete opposition to communalism of all kinds. Nehru was particularly severe in his criticism of communalism of the. Secularism for him was not only a matter of principles, it was also the only guarantee of the unity and integrity of India. Indian secularism does not focus only on church-state separation and the idea of inter-religious equality is  crucial to the Indian conception. Let us elaborate this further. What makes Indian secularism distinctive?  For a start it arose in the context of deep religious diversity that predated the advent of Western modern ideas and nationalism.  There was already a culture of inter-religious  tolerance  in India.  However, we must not forget that tolerance is compatible with religious domination.  It may allow some space to everyone but such freedom is usually limited.  Besides, tolerance allows you to put up with people whom you find deeply repugnant. This is a great virtue if a society is recovering from a major civil war but not in times of peace where people are struggling for equal dignity and respect. Do you remember the heated debate in France over the French government's decision to ban the usage of religious markers like turbans and veils in That is because the ideal of secularism envisaged in India is different from that of France. Yes I remember.  Isn't it strange that both India and France are secular, but in India there is no prohibition on wearing or displaying such religious markers in public The advent of western modernity brought to the fore hitherto neglected and marginalised notions of equality in Indian thought. It sharpened these ideas and helped us to focus on equality within the community.  It also ushered ideas of inter-community equality to replace the notion of hierarchy.  Thus Indian secularism took on a distinct form as a result of an interaction between what already existed in a society that had religious diversity and the ideas that came from the west. It resulted in equal focus on intra-religious and inter- religious domination. Indian secularism equally opposed the oppression of dalits and women within Hinduism, the discrimination against women within Indian Islam or Christianity, and the possible threats that  a majority community might pose to the rights of the minority religious communities. This is its first important difference from mainstream western secularism. Connected to it is the second difference. Indian secularism deals not only with religious freedom of individuals but also with religious freedom of minority communities.  Within it, an individual has the right to profess the religion of his or her choice.  Likewise, religious minorities also have a right to exist and to maintain their own culture and educational institutions. A third difference is this.  Since a secular state must be concerned equally with intra-religious domination, Indian secularism has made room for and is compatible with the idea of state-supported religious reform.  Thus, the Indian constitution bans untouchability.  The Indian state has enacted several laws abolishing child marriage and lifting the taboo on inter-caste marriage sanctioned by Hinduism. The question however that arises is: can a state initiate or even support religious reforms and yet be secular? Can a state claim to be secular and not maintain separation of religion from state? The secular character of the Indian state is established by virtue of the fact that it is neither theocratic nor has it established any one or multiple religions. Beyond that it has adopted a very sophisticated policy in pursuit of religious equality. This allows it either to disengage with religion in American style, or engage with it if required. The Indian state may engage with religion negatively to oppose religious tyranny. This is reflected in such actions as the ban on untouchability. It may also choose a positive mode of engagement. Thus, the Indian Constitution grants all religious minorities the right to establish and maintain their own educational institutions which may receive assistance from the state.  All these complex strategies can be adopted by the state to promote the values of peace, freedom and equality. and differences have no significance for the LET S DO IT D Watch films such as Bombay and Garam Hawa? What ideals of secularism do Read a short story  Name  in Forsaking from Ladakh  by Abdul Ghani Sheikh [Published by Katha) Is secularism compatible with the following? Subsidising a pilgrimage for a minority  community. Performing religious rituals in government offices. It should be clear by now why the complexity of Indian secularism cannot be captured by the phrase  equal respect for all religions. If by this phrase is meant peaceful coexistence of all religions or inter- religious toleration, then this will not be enough because secularism is much more than mere peaceful coexistence or toleration. If this phrase means equal feeling of respect towards all established religions and their practices, then there is an ambiguity that needs clearing. Indian secularism allows for principled state intervention in all religions. Such intervention betrays disrespect to some aspects of every religion. For example, religiously sanctioned caste-hierarchies are not acceptable within Indian secularism. The secular state does not have to treat every aspect of every religion with equal respect. It allows equal disrespect for some aspects of organised religions. 8.5 CRITICISMS OF INDIAN SECULARISM Indian secularism has been subjected to fierce criticism. What are these criticisms? Can we defend secularism from them? First, it is often argued that secularism is anti-religious.  We hope to have shown that secularism is against institutionalised religious domination.  This is not the same as being anti-religious. Similarly, it has been argued by some that secularism threatens religious identity.  However, as we noted earlier, secularism promotes religious freedom and equality. Hence, it clearly protects religious identity rather than threatens it.  Of course, it does undermine some forms of religious identity: those, which are dogmatic, violent, fanatical, exclusivist and those, which foster hatred of other religions. The real question is not whether something is undermined but whether what is undermined is intrinsically worthy or unworthy A second criticism is that secularism is a Western concept and, therefore, unsuited to Indian conditions.  On the surface, this is a strange complaint.  For there are millions of things in India today from trousers to the internet and parliamentary democracy have their origins in the west.  One response, therefore, could be: so what? Have you heard a European complain that because zero was invented in India, they will not work with it? However, this is a somewhat shallow response. The more important and relevant point is that for a state to be truly secular, it must have ends of its own.  Western states became secular when, at an important level, they challenged the control of established religious authority over social and political life.  The western model of secularism is  not, therefore, a product of the Christian world. What of the claim that it is western? The mutual exclusion of religion and state, which is supposed to be the ideal of western secular societies, is also not the defining feature of all secular states. The idea of separation can be interpreted differently by different societies. A secular state may keep a principled distance from religion to promote peace between communities and it may also intervene to protect the rights of specific communities. This exactly is what has happened in India. India evolved a variant of secularism that is  not just an implant from the west on Indian soil.  The fact is that the secularism has both western and non- western origins.  In the west, it was the Church-state separation which was central and in countries such as India, the idea of peaceful coexistence of different religious communities has been important. A third accusation against secularism is the charge of minoritism. It is true that Indian secularism advocates minority rights so the question is:  Is this justified? Consider four adults in a compartment of a train travelling at the fastest speed imaginable. In the middle of the journey, one of the four passengers expresses a desire to smoke. The second one complains that he cannot bear cigarette smoke. The other two passengers smoke too but say nothing. Clearly there is a conflict here between two passengers.  A suggestion is made that it be resolved by vote. The two mild smokers go along with the addict and the non-smoker is defeated by a margin of two votes. The person in the minority loses but the result appears fair because a proper democratic procedure adopted by common agreement was Now alter the situation a bit.  Suppose that the non-smoker suffers from asthma. Smoking can induce a life-threatening attack in him.  His preference that the other person does not smoke expresses now his fundamental and very urgent interest.  Would the procedure previously followed, of going with the decision of the majority, be fair in such a context? Do you not think that the addicted smoker should refrain till the train reaches its destination? You will agree that when it comes to fundamental interests, voting as a democratic procedure is inappropriate. A person has a prior right to the satisfaction of his or her significant interests. What holds true of individuals also holds for communities.  The most fundamental interest of minorities must not be harmed and must be protected by constitutional law.  This is exactly how it is in the Indian Constitution. Minority rights are justified as long as these rights protect their fundamental interests. At this point someone might still say that minority rights are special privileges which come with some costs to others. Why then should such special privilege be given?  This question can be best answered by another example. Consider that a film is being shown in an auditorium on the first floor.  The auditorium is accessible by a staircase.  Everyone is free to buy a ticket, go up the stairs and see the film.  Or, are they? Is everyone really free? Suppose that among avid film-goers are some old people, some who have recently broken a leg and others who have long been physically challenged.  None of them can really climb up the stairs.  Do you I thought treating everyone in exactly the same way is not always fair! think it would be wrong if a lift or a ramp was provided for people in wheel chairs?  Doing so enables them to achieve exactly what others routinely procure through the staircase. Yet, this group in minority needs a different mode of getting to the first floor.  If all spaces are structured in such a way that they suit only young, able-bodied persons, then some category of persons will forever be excluded from a simple benefit such as watching a film.  To make a separate arrangement for them is not to accord them any special treatment. It is to treat them with the same respect and dignity with which all others are being treated.  The lesson is that minority rights need not be nor should  be viewed as special privileges. A fourth criticism claims that secularism is coercive and that it interferes excessively with the religious freedom of communities. This misreads Indian secularism. It is true that by rejecting the idea of separation as mutual exclusion, Indian secularism rejects non-interference in religion. But it does not follow that it is excessively interventionist. Indian secularism follows the concept of principled distance which also allows for non- interference. Besides, interference need  not automatically mean coercive intervention. It is of course true that Indian secularism permits state-supported religious reform. But this should not be equated with a change imposed from above, with coercive intervention. But it might be argued: does it do this consistently? Why have personal laws of all religious communities not been reformed?  This is the big dilemma facing the Indian state. A secularist might see the personal laws (laws concerning marriage, inheritance and other family matters which are governed by different religions) as manifestations of community- specific rights that are protected by the Constitution. Or he  might see these laws as an affront to the basic principles of secularism on the ground that they treat women unequally and therefore unjustly. Personal laws can be seen as manifestations of freedom How can a State treat all religions number of holidays to each religion help? Or would on public occasions be a way of doing -religious domination or as instances of intra-religious Such internal conflicts are part and parcel of any complex doctrine but they are not something that we need to  live with forever.  Personal laws can be reformed in such a way that they continue to exemplify both minority rights and equality between men and women.  But such  reform should neither  be brought about by State or group coercion nor should the state adopt a policy of total distance from it.  The state must act as a facilitator by supporting liberal and democratic voices within every religion. Vote Bank Politics Fifth, there is the argument that secularism encourages the politics of vote banks.  As an empirical claim, this is not entirely false. However, we need to put this issue in perspective.  First, in a democracy politicians are bound to seek votes.  That is part of their job and that is what democratic politics is largely about. To blame a politician for pursuing a group of people or promising to initiate a policy with the motivation to secure their votes is unfair. The real question is what precisely the vote is sought for.  Is it to promote solely his self-interest or power or is it also for the welfare of the group in question?  If the group which voted for the politician does not get any benefit from this act, then surely the politician must be blamed.  If secular politicians who sought the votes of minorities also manage to give them what they want, then this is a success of the secular project which aims, after all, to also protect the interests of the minorities. But what if the welfare of the group in question is sought at the cost of the welfare and rights of other groups?  What if the interests of the majority are undermined by these secular politicians? Then a new injustice is born.  Can you think of such examples? In theory, there may not be anything wrong with vote bank politics but only when vote bank politics leads to the mobilisation of a social group to vote en masse for a particular candidate or political party during elections, this distorts electoral politics. Here, the important feature is that the whole group works as a single monolithic unit during voting. Despite the diversity within the unit, the party or leader pursuing such vote bank politics tries to artificially construct a belief that the interest of the group is one. In effect, by doing this, the political parties  priorities short- term electoral gains over the long- term development and governance needs of society. In India it has been observed that political parties neglecting substantive issues have often focused on emotive issues for electoral gains, neglecting genuine problems faced by the community. Competitive vote bank politics has the potential to exacerbate social division by portraying different groups as rivals vying for limited resources. In India, the vote bank politics is also associated with minority appeasement. This means that the political parties disregard the principles of equality of all citizens and give priority to the interests of a minority group. Ironically this has led to further alienation and marginalization of the minority group. As vote bank politics fails to acknowledge diversity within the minority group taking up issues of social reform within these groups has also proved difficult. A final, cynical criticism might be this: Secularism cannot work because it tries to do too much, to find a solution to an intractable problem. What is this problem? People with deep religious differences will never live together in peace. Now, this is an empirically false claim. The history of Indian civilisation shows that this kind of living together is realisable. It was realised elsewhere too. The Ottoman Empire is a stirring example. But now critics might say that co-existence under conditions of inequality was indeed possible. Everyone could find a place in a hierarchically arranged order. The point, they claim, is that this will not work today when equality is increasingly becoming a dominant cultural value. There is another way of responding to this criticism. Far from pursuing an impossible objective Indian secularism mirrors the future of the world. A great experiment is being carried out in India watched with razor -sharp eyes and with great interest by the whole world. It is doing so because with the migration of people from the former colonies to the west, and the increased movement of people across the globe with  the intensification of globalisation, Europe and America and some parts of the Middle-East are beginning to resemble India in the diversity of cultures and religions which are present in their societies. These societies are watching the future of the Indian experiment with keen interest. Name of the holiday Date according to Mahatma Gandhi s Birthday (Birthday of Prophet Mohammad) Guru Nanak s Birthday Read out the list of gazetted holidays in India. Does it uphold the case of Secularism in India? Give your arguments. Which of the following do you feel are compatible with the idea of secularism? Give reasons. (a) Absence of domination of one religious group by another. (b) Recognition of a state religion. (c) Equal state support to all religions. (d) Mandatory prayers  in  schools. (e) Allowing separate educational institutions for any minority Appointment of temple management bodies by the government. (g) Intervention  of state to ensure entry of Dalits in temples. Some of the key characteristics of western and Indian model of secularism have got mixed up. Separate them and make a new table. Strict non-interference of State supported religious religion and state in each Equality between different Equality between different religious groups is a key concern sects of a religion is Attention to minority rights Less attention to community Individual and his rights at the Rights of both individual and What do you understand by secularism? Can it be equated with Do you agree with the following statements? Give reasons for supporting or opposing any of them. (a) Secularism does not allow us to have a religious identity. (b) Secularism is against inequality within a religious group or between different religious groups. (c) Secularism has a western-Christian origin. It is not suitable for 5. Indian secularism focuses on more than the religion-state separation. Explain the concept of principled distance. Credit: Images on opening page: Sanjeev Chetan Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? WHY AND HOW? This book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters that follow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of our Constitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government in our country and their relationship with each other. But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidents and prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the government and the various principles that bind the institutions of government have their origin in the Constitution of India. After studying this chapter, you  will learn:   what a constitution means;   what a constitution does to the society;   how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and   what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made. Indian Constitution at Work WHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION? What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does it perform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you might Constitution allows coordination and Imagine yourself to be a member of a reasonably large group. Further imagine that this group has the following characteristics. The members of this group are diverse in various ways. They have different religious allegiances: some are Hindus, some are Muslims, some Christians and some perhaps profess no religion at all. They are also varied in many different respects: they pursue different professions, have different abilities, have different hobbies, different tastes in everything from films to books. Some are rich and some are poor. Some are old, some young. Imagine further that members of this group are likely to have disputes over various aspects of life: How much property should one be allowed to own?  Should it be compulsory that every child be sent to school or should the parents be allowed to decide? How much should this group spend on its safety and security? Or should it build more parks instead? Should the group be allowed to discriminate against some of its members?  Every question will elicit a variety of answers from different people. But, for all their diversity, this group has to live together. They are dependent upon each other in various ways. They require the cooperation of each other. What will enable the group to live together Yes, this could be my colony as well! Does this apply to your village or town or colony too? This group is very much like the people of my village. Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? One may say that perhaps members of this group can live together if they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certain basic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of some basic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because they would not know what members of this group could do to each other, who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basic rules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members of that group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable.  If citizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, they will themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished. The first function of a constitution is to provide a set of basic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst members of a society. Enact the thought experiment of this section in the classroom. The entire class should discuss and arrive at some decisions that would apply to everyone for this entire session. The decision could be about: How would the class representatives be chosen? Which decisions will the representative be able to take on behalf of the entire class? Are there some decisions that the class representative cannot take without consulting the You can add any other items to this list (collection of common kitty for the class, organisation of picnic and trips, sharing of common resources,  ) as long as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you include those subjects that have led to any differences in the past. How to revise these decisions in case you Indian Constitution at Work Write down all these decisions on a paper and put it up on the notice board. Which problems did you encounter in this decision? Were there differences among different students? How did you resolve these differences? Did the entire class gain something from this exercise? Specification of decision making powers A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to which a state is constituted or governed. But what should these fundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well, the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, but others may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferences should govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best. How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. It specifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchical constitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the old Soviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide. But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that the people should decide, it will not answer the question: how should the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agree to it? Should  the people directly vote on each matter as the ancient Greeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing representatives? But if the people act through their representatives, how should these representatives be elected? How many should there In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in most instances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Before identifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? who has the authority to enact it. If Parliament has the authority to enact laws,  there must be a law that bestows this authority on Parliament  in the first place. This is the function of the constitution. It is an authority that constitutes government in the first The second function of a constitution is to specify who has the decisions in a society. It decides how the government will be Limitations on the powers of government But this is clearly not enough. Suppose you decided who had the decisions. But then this authority passed laws that you thought were patently unfair. It prohibited you from practising your religion for instance. Or it enjoined that clothes of a prohibited, or that you were not free to sing certain songs or that people who belonged to a particular group (caste or religion) would always have to serve others and would not be allowed to retain any property. Or that government could arbitrarily arrest someone, or that only people of a certain skin colour would be allowed to draw water from wells. You would obviously think these laws were unjust and unfair. And even though they were passed by a government that had come into existence based  European Constitution  by Patrick Chappate, International Herald Tribune, 21SEP04 Copyright Cagle Cartoons. READ A CARTOON Countries of the European Union tried to create a European constitution. The attempt failed. Here is a cartoonist s impression of this attempt. Does this always happen in any constitution making? Indian Constitution at Work on certain procedures there would be something obviously unjust about that government enacting these So the third function of a constitution is to set some limits on what a government can  impose on its citizens. These limits are fundamental in the sense that government may never trespass them. Constitutions limit the power of government in many ways. The most common way of limiting the power of government is to specify certain fundamental rights that all of us possess as citizens and which no government can ever be allowed to violate.  The exact content and interpretation of these rights varies from constitution to constitution. But most constitutions will protect a basic cluster of rights. Citizens will be protected from being arrested arbitrarily and for no reason. This is one basic limitation upon the power of government. Citizens will normally have the right to some basic liberties: to freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association, freedom to conduct a trade or business  etc. In practice, these rights can be limited  during times of national emergency and the constitution specifies the circumstances under which these rights may be Aspirations and goals of a society Most of the older constitutions limited themselves largely to allocating decision-making power and setting some limits to government power. But many twentieth century constitutions, of which the Indian Constitution is the finest example, also provide an enabling framework for the government to do certain positive things, to express the aspirations and goals of society. The Indian Constitution was particularly innovative in this respect. Societies with deep entrenched inequalities of various kinds, will not only have to set limits on the power of government, they will also have to enable and empower the government to take positive measures to overcome forms of inequality or deprivation. Ah! So you first create a monster and then start worrying about saving yourself from it! I would say, why create this monster called government in the first place? Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? For example, India aspires to be a society that is free of caste discrimination. If this is our society s aspiration, the government will have to be enabled or empowered to take all the necessary steps to achieve this goal. In a country like South Africa, which had a deep history of racial discrimination, its new constitution had to enable the government to end racial discrimination. More positively, a constitution may enshrine the aspirations of a society. The framers of the Indian Constitution, for example, thought that each individual in society should have all that is necessary for them to lead a life of minimal dignity and social self-respect   minimum material well-being, education etc. The Indian Constitution enables the government to take positive welfare measures some of which are legally enforceable. As we go on studying the Indian Constitution, we shall find that such enabling Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. READ A CARTOON The constitution makers have to address themselves to very different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this 4 December 1949 Indian Constitution at Work provisions have the support of the Preamble to our Constitution, and these provisions are found in the section on Fundamental Rights. The Directive Principles of State of Policy also enjoin government to fulfil certain aspirations of the people. The fourth function of a constitution is to enable the government to fulfil the aspirations of a society and create conditions for a just society. Enabling provisions of the Constitution Constitutions are not only rules and regulations controlling the powers of the government. They also give powers to the government for pursuing collective good of the society. Constitution of South Africa assigns many responsibilities to the government: it wants the government to take measures to promote conservation of nature, make efforts to protect persons or groups subjected to unfair discrimination, and provides that  the government must progressively ensure adequate housing to all, health care, etc. In the case of Indonesia also, the government is enjoined to establish and conduct national education system. The Indonesian Constitution ensures that the poor and destitute children will be looked after by the government. Fundamental identity of a people Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a This means the people as a collective entity come into being only through the basic constitution. It is by  agreeing to a basic set of norms about how  one should be governed, and who should be governed that one forms a collective identity.  One has many sets of identities that exist prior to a constitution. But  by What does it take to write nice things in the constitution? What is the point in writing down lofty aspirations and goals if they cannot change the life of the people? Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? agreeing to certain basic norms and principles  one constitutes  one s basic political identity. Second, constitutional norms are the overarching framework within which one pursues individual aspirations, goals and freedoms. The constitution sets authoritative constraints upon what  one may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that we may not trespass. So the constitution also gives one a moral identity.  Third and finally, it may be the case that many basic political and moral values are now shared across different constitutional traditions. If  one looks at constitutions around the world, they differ in many respects   in the form of government they enjoin in many procedural details. But they also share a good deal. Most modern constitutions create a form of government that is democratic in some respects, most claim to protect certain basic rights. But constitutions are different in the way they embody conceptions of national identity. Most nations are an amalgamation of a complex set of historical traditions; they weave together the diverse groups that reside within the nation in different ways. For example, German identity was constituted by being ethnically German. The constitution gave expression to this identity. The Indian Constitution, on the other hand, does not make ethnic identity a criterion for citizenship. Different nations embody different conceptions of what the relationship READ A CARTOON The writing of the new Iraqi constitution after the collapse of Saddam Hussain s regime saw a lot of conflict between different ethnic groups in the country. What do these different people stand for? Compare the conflict depicted here with that depicted in earlier cartoons for the European Union and  Iraqi Constitution, John Trever, Albuquerque Journal, 18AUG05. Copyright. Cagle Cartoons. Indian Constitution at Work between the different regions of a nation and the central government should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a Check your progress Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions. For each of these write the function that this provision The government cannot Limitations on the order any citizen to follow power of the or not to follow any religion The government must try to reduce inequalities in income and wealth The President has the power to appoint the Prime Minister The Constitution is the supreme law that everyone has to obey Indian citizenship is not limited to people of any race, caste or religion THE AUTHORITY OF A CONSTITUTION We have outlined some of the functions a constitution performs. These functions explain why most societies have a constitution. But there are three further questions we can ask about constitutions: Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? a) What is  a constitution? b) How effective is a constitution? c) Is  a constitution just? In most countries,  Constitution  is a compact document that comprises a number of articles about the state, specifying how the state is to be constituted and what norms it should follow. When we ask for the constitution of a country we are usually referring to this document. But some countries, the United Kingdom for instance, do not have one single document that can be called the Constitution. Rather they have a series of documents and decisions that, taken collectively, are referred to as the constitution. So, we can say that constitution is the document or set of documents that seeks to perform the functions that we mentioned above. But many constitutions around the world exist only on paper; they are mere words existing on a parchment. The crucial question is: how effective is a constitution? What makes it effective? What ensures that it has a real impact on the lives of people? Making a constitution effective depends upon  many factors. Mode of promulgation This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who crafted the constitution and how much authority did they have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry the people with them. The most successful constitutions, like India, South Africa and the United States, are constitutions which  were created in the aftermath of popular national movements. Although India s Constitution was formally created by a Constituent Assembly between December 1946 and November 1949, it drew upon a long history of the nationalist movement that had a remarkable ability to take along different sections of Indian society together. The Constitution drew enormous legitimacy from the What do people do if they find out that their constitution is not just? What happens to people when a constitution exists only on paper? Indian Constitution at Work fact that it was drawn up by people who enjoyed immense public credibility, who had the capacity to negotiate and command the respect of a wide cross-section of society, and who were able to convince the people that the constitution was not an instrument for the aggrandisement of their personal power. The final document reflected the broad national consensus at the time. Some countries have subjected their constitution to a full-fledged referendum, where all the people vote on the desirability of a Constitution was never subjected to such a referendum, but nevertheless carried enormous public authority, because it had the consensus and backing of leaders who were themselves Constitution itself was not subjected to a referendum, the people adopted it as their own by abiding by its provisions. Therefore, the authority of people who enact the constitution helps determine in part its prospects for The substantive provisions of a It is the hallmark of a successful constitution that it gives everyone in society some reason to go along with its provisions. A constitution Debate over Constitution making in Nepal: Making a constitution is not always an easy and smooth affair. Nepal is an example of the complicated nature of constitution making. Since 1948, Nepal has had five constitutions, in 1948, 1951, 1959, 1962 and 1990. But all these constitutions were  granted  by the constitution introduced a multi- party competition, though the King continued to hold final powers in many respects. For many years Nepal was faced with militant political agitations for restructuring the government. The main issue was the role of the monarchy in the constitution of Nepal. Some groups in Nepal wanted to abolish the institution of monarchy and establish republican form of government. Others believed that it may be useful to shift to limited monarchy with a reduced role for the King. The King himself was not ready to give up powers. He took over all powers in October 2002. Many political parties and organisations demanded the formation of a new constituent assembly. The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) was in the forefront of the struggle for a popularly elected constituent assembly. Finally, under pressure of popular agitation, the King had to install a government acceptable to the agitating parties. This government has stripped the King of almost all powers. In 2008, Nepal emerged as a democratic republic after abolishing the monarchy. Finally, Nepal adopted a new constitution Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? that, for instance, allowed permanent majorities to oppress minority groups within society would give minorities no reason to go along with the provision of the constitution. Or a constitution that systematically privileged some members at the expense of others, or that systematically entrenched the power of small groups in society, would cease to command allegiance. If any group feels their identity is being stifled, they will have no reason to abide by the constitution. No constitution by itself achieves perfect justice. But it has to convince people that it provides the framework for pursuing basic justice. Do this thought experiment. Ask yourself this question: What would be the content of some basic rules in society, such that they gave everyone a reason to go along with them? The more a constitution preserves the freedom and equality of all its members, the more likely it is to succeed. Does the Indian Constitution, broadly speaking, give everyone a reason to go along with its broad outlines? After studying this book, one should be able to answer this question in the affirmative. Balanced institutional design Constitutions are often subverted, not by the people, but by small groups, who wish to enhance their own power. Well crafted constitutions fragment power in society intelligently so that no single group can subvert the constitution. One way of such intelligent designing of a constitution is to ensure that no single institution acquires monopoly of power. This is often done by fragmenting power across different institutions. The Indian Constitution, for example, horizontally fragments power across different institutions like the Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and even independent statutory bodies like the Election Commission. This ensures that even if one institution wants to subvert the Constitution, others can check its transgressions. An intelligent system of checks and balances has facilitated the success of the Indian Constitution. Another important aspect of intelligent institutional design is: that a constitution must strike the right balance between certain values, norms and procedures as authoritative, and at the same time allow enough flexibility in its operations to adapt to changing needs and circumstances. Too rigid a constitution is likely to break under the weight of change; a constitution that is, on the other Indian Constitution at Work hand, too flexible, will give no security, predictability or identity to a people. Successful constitutions strike the right balance between preserving core values and adapting them to new circumstances. You will notice the wisdom of makers of the Indian Constitution  in the chapter on the Constitution as a living document (Chapter 9). The Indian Constitution is described as  a living  document.  By striking a balance between the possibility to change the provisions and the limits on such changes, the Constitution has ensured that it will survive as a document respected by people. This arrangement also ensures that no section or group can, on its own, subvert Therefore in determining whether a constitution has authority you can ask yourself three questions: Were the people who enacted the constitution credible?  This question will be answered in the remaining part of this chapter. Secondly, did the constitution ensure that power was intelligently organised so that it was not easy for any group to subvert the constitution? And, most importantly, does the constitution give everyone some reason to go along with it? Most of this book is about this question. Also, is the constitution the locus of people s hopes and aspiration? The ability of the constitution to command voluntary allegiance of the people depends to a certain extent upon whether the constitution is just. What are the principles of justice underlying the Indian Constitution? The last chapter of this book will answer this question. How was the Indian Constitution made? Let us find out how the Indian Constitution was made. Formally, the elected for undivided India. It held its first sitting on READ A CARTOON Why does the cartoonist describe the new Iraqi Constitution as the castle of cards? Would this description apply to the Indian  Castle of Cards, Ares, copyright Cagle Cartoons, SEP05 Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats. The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of proportional representation with single transferable vote. The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely States was to be determined by consultation. For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html  We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well. Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many. Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p.979, 25 November 1949 Are the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity being practised in your classroom? How can they coexist? Discuss this with your friends. Indian Constitution at Work The previous section  discusses the three factors that make a constitution effective and respectable. How far does the Indian Constitution pass this test? Composition of the Constituent Assembly As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of 3 June 1947 those members who were elected from territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284 members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and appended their signature to the Constitution as finally passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January 1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also learnt the right lessons from the  unimaginable violence that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not only would minorities be secure, but religious identity would have no bearing on citizenship rights. But this account of the composition of the Constituent Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although, the members of the Assembly were not elected by universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make the Assembly a representative body. Members of all religions were given representation under the scheme described above; in addition, the Assembly had twenty- eight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate almost all shades of opinion within it. What would have happened if the Constituent Assembly was elected by all the people of India? Could it be very different from what it was? Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? The Principle of Deliberation The authority of the Constituent Assembly does not come only from the fact that it was broadly, though not perfectly, representative. It comes from the procedures it adopted to frame the Constitution and the values its members brought to their deliberations. While in any assembly that claims to be representative, it is desirable that diverse sections of society participate, it is equally important that they participate not only as representatives of their own identity or community. Each member deliberated upon the Constitution with the interests of the whole nation in mind. There were often disagreements amongst members, but few of these disagreements could be traced to members protecting their own interests. There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences were many: should India adopt a centralised or decentralised system of government? What should be the relations between the States and the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage (meaning that all citizens reaching a certain age, would be entitled to be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income). So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously discussed and debated. Nothing can be a better testament to the democratic commitment of this Assembly. The Constitution drew its authority from the fact that members of the Constituent Assembly engaged in what one might call public reason. The members of the Assembly placed a great emphasis on discussion and reasoned argument. They did not simply advance their own interests, but gave principled reasons to other members for their positions. The very act of giving reasons to others makes you move away from simply a narrow consideration of your own interest because you have to give reasons to others to make them go along with your view point. The voluminous debates in the Indian Constitution at Work Constituent Assembly, where each clause of the Constitution was subjected to scrutiny and debate, is a tribute to public reason at its best. These debates deserved to be memorialised as one of the most significant chapters in the history of constitution making, equal in importance to the French and American revolutions. The importance of public reason was emphasised in the mundane procedures of the Assembly as well. The Constituent Assembly had eight major Committees on different subjects. Usually, Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra Prasad, Sardar Patel or B.R. Committees. These were not men things. Ambedkar had been a bitter critic of the Congress and Gandhi, accusing them of not doing enough for the upliftment of Scheduled Castes. Patel and Nehru disagreed on many issues. Nevertheless, they all worked together. Each particular provisions of the Constitution which were then subjected to debate by the entire Assembly. Usually an attempt was made to reach a consensus  with the belief that provisions agreed to by all, would not be detrimental to any provisions were subject to the vote. But in each instance every single argument, query or concern was responded to with great care and READ A CARTOON The President of the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Rajendra Prasad and the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar greeting each other... I have realised as nobody else could have, with what zeal and devotion the members of the Drafting Committee and especially its Chairman, Dr. Ambedkar in spite of his indifferent health, have worked. We could never make a decision which was or could be ever so right as when we put him on the Drafting Committee and made him its Chairman. He has not only justified his selection but has added lustre to the work which he has done. In this connection, it would be invidious to make any distinction as among the other members of the Committee. I know they have all worked with the same zeal and devotion as its Chairman, and they deserve the thanks of Dr. Rajendra Prasad CAD, Vol. XI, p.994, 26 November 1949 Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? in writing. The Assembly met for one hundred and sixty six days, spread over two years and eleven months. Its sessions were open to the press and the public alike. Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement Inheritance of the nationalist movement But no constitution is simply a product of the Assembly that produces it. An Assembly as diverse as the Constituent Assembly of India could not have functioned if there was no background consensus on the main principles the Constitution should enshrine. These principles were forged during the long struggle for freedom. In a way, the Constituent Assembly was giving concrete shape and form to the principles it had  inherited from the nationalist movement. For decades preceding the promulgation of the Constitution, the nationalist movement had debated many questions that were relevant to the making of the constitution   the shape and form of government India should have, the values it should uphold, the inequalities it should overcome. Answers forged in those debates were given their final form in the Constitution. Perhaps the best summary of the principles that the nationalist movement brought to the Constituent Assembly is the Objective Resolution (the resolution that defined the aims of the Assembly) moved by Nehru in 1946. This resolution encapsulated the aspirations and values behind the Constitution. What the previous section terms as substantive provisions of the constitution  is inspired by and summed up by the values incorporated in the Objectives Resolution. Based on this resolution, our Constitution gave institutional expression to these fundamental commitments: equality, liberty, democracy, sovereignty and a cosmopolitan identity. Thus, our Constitution is not merely a maze of rules and procedures, but a moral commitment to establish a government that will fulfil the many promises that the nationalist movement held before the people. What would have happened if we got independence in 1937? Or if we had to wait till 1957? Would our Constitution be very different from what it is Indian Constitution at Work Main points of the Objectives Resolution India is an independent, sovereign, republic; India shall be a Union of erstwhile British Indian territories, Indian States, and other parts outside British India and Indian States as are willing to be a part of the Union; Territories forming the Union shall be autonomous units and exercise all powers and functions of the Government and administration, except those assigned to or vested in the Union; All powers and authority of sovereign and independent India and its constitution shall flow from the people; All people of India shall be guaranteed and secured social, economic and political justice; equality of status and opportunities and equality before law; and fundamental freedoms - of speech, expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action - subject to law and public morality; The minorities, backward and tribal areas, depressed and other backward classes shall be provided adequate The territorial integrity of the Republic and its sovereign rights on land, sea and air shall be maintained according to justice and law of civilized nations; The land would make full and willing contribution to the promotion of world peace and welfare of mankind. The third factor ensuring effectiveness of a constitution is a balanced arrangement of the institutions of government. The basic principle is that government must be democratic and committed to the welfare of the people. The Constituent Assembly spent a lot of time on evolving the right balance among the various institutions like the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. This led to the adoption of the parliamentary form and the federal arrangement, which would distribute governmental powers between the Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? legislature and the executive on the one hand and between the States and the central government on the While evolving the most balanced governmental arrangements, the makers of our Constitution did not hesitate to learn from experiments and experiences of other countries. Thus, the framers of the Constitution were not averse to borrowing from other constitutional traditions. Indeed, it is a testament to their wide learning that they could lay their hands upon any intellectual argument, or historical example that was necessary for fulfilling the task at hand. So they borrowed a number of provisions from different countries. But borrowing these ideas was not slavish imitation. Far from it. Each provision of the Constitution had to be defended on grounds that it was suited to Indian problems and aspirations. India was extremely lucky to have an Assembly that instead of being parochial in its outlook could take the best available everywhere in the world and make it their own. Was it a borrowed constitution then? Why could we not have a constitution that does not  One likes to ask whether there can be anything new in a Constitution framed at this hour in the history of the world  The only new things, if there can be any, in a Constitution framed so late in the day  are the variations made to remove the faults and to accommodate it to the needs of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar CAD, Vol. VII, p.37, 4 November 1948 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar presiding over a discussion in the Indian Constitution at Work Provisions adapted from constitutions of different First Past the Post Parliamentary Form of The idea of the rule of law Institution of the Speaker and her/his role Power of Judicial A quasi-federal form of government (a federal system with a The idea of Residual Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? It is a tribute to the wisdom and foresight of the makers of the Constitution that they presented to the nation a document that enshrined fundamental values and highest aspirations shared by the people. This is one of the reasons why this most intricately crafted document has not only survived but become a living reality, when so many other constitutions have perished with the paper they were first written on. India s Constitution is a unique document which in turn became an exemplar for many other constitutions, most notably South Africa. The main purpose behind the long search that went on for almost three years was to strike the right balance so that institutions created by the Constitution would not be haphazard or tentative arrangements but would be able to accommodate the aspirations of the people of India for a long time to come. You will know more about these arrangements through the study of the remaining chapters in this book. Which of these is not a function of the constitution? It gives a guarantee of the rights of the citizen. It marks out different spheres of power for different branches of It ensures that good people come to power. It gives expression to some shared values. Which of the following is a good reason to conclude that the authority of the constitution is higher than that of the parliament? The constitution was framed before the parliament came into The constitution makers were more eminent leaders than the members of the parliament. The constitution specifies how parliament is to be formed and what are its powers. The constitution cannot be amended by the parliament. Indian Constitution at Work 3. State whether the following statements about a constitution are True Constitutions are written documents about formation and power of the government. Constitutions exist and are required only in democratic Constitution is a legal document that does not deal with ideals A constitution gives its citizens a new identity. 4.  State whether the following inferences about the making of the Indian Constitution are Correct or Incorrect. Give reasons to support your The Constituent Assembly did not represent the Indian people since it was not elected by all citizens. Constitution making did not involve any major decision since there was a general consensus among the leaders at that time about its basic framework. There was little originality in the Constitution, for much of it was borrowed from other countries. Give two examples each to support the following conclusions about the Indian Constitution: The Constitution was made by credible leaders who commanded The Constitution has distributed power in such a way as to it difficult to subvert it. The Constitution is the locus of people s hopes and aspirations. Why is it necessary for a country to have a clear demarcation of powers and responsibilities in the constitution? What would happen in the absence of such a demarcation? Why is it necessary for a constitution to place limitations on the rulers? Can there be a constitution that gives no power at all to the The Japanese Constitution was made when the US occupation army was still in control of Japan after its defeat in the Second World War. The Japanese constitution could not have had any provision that the US government did not like. Do you see any problem in Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How? this way of making the constitution? In which way was the Indian experience different from this? 9. Rajat asked his teacher this question:   The constitution is a fifty year old and therefore outdated book. No one took my consent for implementing it. It is written in such tough language that I cannot understand it. Tell me why should I obey this document?  If you were the teacher, how would you answer Rajat? 10. In a discussion on the experience of the working of our Constitution, three speakers took three different positions: Harbans: The Indian Constitution has succeeded in giving us a framework of democratic government. Neha: The Constitution made solemn promises of ensuring liberty, equality and fraternity. Since this has not happened, the Constitution has failed. Nazima: The Constitution has not failed us. We have failed the Do you agree with any of these positions? If yes, why? If not, what is your own position? You may watch and discuss the Rajya Sabha TV Series, Samvidhaan: The Making of the Constitution of India, and films such as Gandhi, Sardar, and Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. These audio-visual materials will deepen your understanding of the context in which the Constitution was made. They will also help you to learn about the life and times of our national leaders. Indian Constitution at Work RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN A constitution is not only about the composition of the various organs of government and the relations among them. As we studied in the last chapter, the constitution is a document that sets limits on the powers of the government and ensures a democratic system in which all persons enjoy certain rights. In this chapter, we shall study the Fundamental Rights contained in the Indian Constitution.  Part three of the Constitution of India lists the Fundamental Rights and also mentions the limits on these rights. In the past six decades, the scope of rights has changed and in some respects, expanded. After studying this chapter, you would know   what are the various Fundamental Rights listed in the Constitution of India;   how these rights are protected;   what role the judiciary has played in protecting and interpreting these rights;   what is the difference between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy. Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution THE IMPORTANCE OF RIGHTS In 1982 during the construction work for Asian Games the government engaged a few contractors. These contractors employed a large number of very poor construction workers from different parts of the country to build the flyovers and stadiums. These workers were kept in poor working conditions and were paid less than the minimum wages decided by the government. A team of social scientists studied their poor condition and petitioned the Supreme Court. They argued that employing a person to work for less than the minimum prescribed wage amounts to begar or forced labour, which is a violation of the Fundamental Right against exploitation. The court accepted this plea and directed the government to ensure that thousands of workers get the prescribed wages for their work. Machal Lalung was 23 when he was arrested. A resident of Chuburi village of Morigaon district of Assam, Machal was charged of causing grievous injuries. He was found mentally too unstable to stand trial and was sent as under trial to Lok Priya Gopinath Bordoloi Mental Hospital in Tejpur for treatment. Machal was treated successfully and doctors wrote twice to jail authorities in 1967 and 1996 that he was fit to stand  trial. But no one paid any attention. Machal Lalung remained in  judicial custody.  Machal Lalung was released in July 2005. He was 77 then. He spent 54 years under custody during which his case never came up for hearing. He was freed when a team appointed by the National Human Rights Commission intervened after an inspection of undertrials in the State. Machal s entire life was wasted because a proper trial against him never took place. Our Constitution gives every citizen the right to  life and liberty: this means that every citizen must also have the right to fair and speedy trial. Machal s case shows what happens when rights granted by the Constitution are not available in practice. What if Machal was a rich and powerful man? What if those working with the construction contractor were engineers? Would their rights have been Indian Constitution at Work In the case of the first instance also there was violation of rights provided in the Constitution. But it was challenged in the court. As a result, workers could get what was due to them in the form of their rightful wages. The constitutional guarantee of the right against exploitation ensured justice to these workers. Bill of Rights Both these examples show the importance of having rights and of the actual implementation of these rights. A democracy must ensure that individuals have certain rights and that the government will always recognise these rights. Therefore it is often a practice in most democratic countries to list the rights of the citizens in the constitution itself. Such a list of rights mentioned and protected by the constitution is called the  bill of rights. A bill of rights prohibits government from thus acting against the rights of the individuals and ensures a remedy in case there is violation of these rights. From whom does a constitution protect the rights of the individual? The rights of a person may be threatened by another person or private organisation. In such a situation, the individual would need the protection of the government. So, it is necessary that the government is bound to protect the rights of the individual. On the other hand, the organs of the government (the legislature, executive, bureaucracy or even the judiciary), in the course of their functioning, may violate the rights of the person. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN During our freedom struggle, the leaders of the freedom movement had realised the importance of rights and demanded that the British rulers should respect rights of the people. The Motilal Nehru committee had demanded a bill of rights as far back as in 1928. It was therefore, natural that when India became independent and the Constitution was being prepared, there were no I get it! The bill of rights is like a warrantee card that we get when we purchase a TV or a fan. Isn t it? Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution Bill of rights in the South African The South African Constitution was inaugurated in December 1996. Its creation and promulgation took place at a time when South Africa still faced the threat of a civil war after the dissolution of the Apartheid government. The South African Constitution says that its  Bill of Rights is a cornerstone of democracy in South Africa. It forbids discrimination on the grounds of  race, gender, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or social origin, colour, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth. It grants perhaps the most extensive range of rights to the citizens. A special constitutional court enforces the rights enshrined in the constitution. Some of the Rights included in the constitution of South Africa Right to Dignity Right to Privacy Right to fair labour practices Right to healthy environment and right to protection of Right to adequate housing Right to health care, food, water and social security Right to basic and higher Right of cultural, religious and Right to information two opinions on the inclusion and protection of rights in the Constitution. The Constitution listed the rights that would be specially protected and called them  fundamental rights. The word fundamental suggests that these rights are so important that the Constitution has separately listed them and made special provisions for their protection. The Fundamental Rights are so important that the Constitution itself ensures that they are not violated by the Fundamental Rights are different from other rights available to us. While ordinary legal rights are protected and enforced by ordinary law, Fundamental Rights are protected and guaranteed by the constitution of the country. Ordinary rights may be changed by the legislature by ordinary process of law making, but a fundamental right may only be changed by amending the Constitution itself. Besides this, no organ of the government can act in a manner that violates them. As we shall study below in this chapter, judiciary has the powers and responsibility to protect the fundamental rights from violations by actions of the Indian Constitution at Work government. Executive as well as legislative actions can be declared illegal by the judiciary if these violate the fundamental rights or restrict them in an unreasonable manner. However, fundamental rights are not absolute or unlimited rights. Government can put reasonable restrictions on the exercise of our fundamental rights. RIGHT TO EQUALITY Consider the following two situations. These are imaginary situations. But similar things do happen and can happen. Do you think they involve violation of fundamental rights? Swadesh Kumar is visiting his village. He is accompanied by one of his friends. They decided to have a cup of tea at the village roadside hotel. The shopkeeper knew Swadesh Kumar but asked the name of his friend to know his caste. After this the shopkeeper served tea to Swadesh Kumar in a nice mug while his friend was given tea in an earthen cup because he was dalit. An order is served to four newsreaders of a television channel that they would no longer read the news on screen. They are all women. The reason given is that they are above the age of forty-five. Two male newsreaders above the same age are not barred from presenting the news. Check your progress Compare the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution with the Bill of Rights in the South African Constitution. Make a list of rights that are: Common to both the constitutions Available in South Africa but not in India Clearly granted in South Africa but implicit in the Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution Right to Equality  Equality before law   equal protection of laws  Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth   equal access to shops, hotels, wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads etc.  Equality of opportunity in public  Abolition of Untouchability  Abolition of titles Right to Freedom  Protection of Right to   freedom of speech and expression;   assemble peacefully;   form associations/unions;   move freely throughout the territory   reside and settle in any part of India;   practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.  Protection in respect of conviction for  Right to life and personal liberty  Right to education  Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases Right against Exploitation  Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour  Prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs Right to Freedom of Religion  Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of  Freedom to manage religious affairs  Freedom to pay taxes for promotion of any particular religion  Freedom to attend religious instruction or worship in certain educational Cultural and Educational Rights  Protection of language, culture of  Right of minorities to establish Right to Constitutional Remedies  Right to move the courts to issue directions/orders/writs for enforcement Indian Constitution at Work Article 16 (4):  Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the These are examples of clear discrimination. In one instance the discrimination is based on caste and in another it is based on gender. Do you think that such discrimination is justified? Right to equality tries to do away with such and other discriminations. It provides for equal access to public places like shops, hotels, places of entertainment, wells, bathing ghats and places of worship. There cannot be any discrimination in this access on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. It also prohibits any discrimination in public employment on any of the above mentioned basis. This right is very important because our society did not practice equal access in the The practice of untouchability is one of the crudest manifestations of inequality. This has been abolished under the right to equality. The same right also provides that the state shall confer no title on a person except those who excel themselves in military or academic field. Thus right to equality strives to make India a true democracy by ensuring a sense of equality of dignity and status among all its citizens. Have you read the Preamble to our Constitution? How does it describe equality? You will find that the Preamble mentions two things about equality: equality Do such things really happen in our country? Or are these purely Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution of status and equality of opportunity. Equality of opportunity means that all sections of the society enjoy equal opportunities. But in a society where there are various kinds of social inequalities, what does equal opportunity mean? The Constitution clarifies that the government can implement special schemes and measures for improving the conditions of certain sections of society: children, women, and the socially and educationally backward classes. You may have heard about  reservations  in jobs, and in admissions. You would have wondered why there are reservations if we follow the principle of equality. In fact Article 16(4) of the constitution explicitly clarifies that a policy like reservation will not be seen as a violation of right to equality. If you see the spirit of the Constitution, this is required for the fulfilment of the right to equality of opportunity. YOU ARE THE JUDGE You have received a postcard from Hadibandhu, who identifies himself as a  member of the dalit community  in Puri district in Odisha. Men from this community refused to follow a custom that required them to wash the feet of the groom and guests of the  upper caste  during marriage ceremonies. In revenge, four women from this community were beaten up and another was paraded naked. The postcard writer says  Our children are educated and they are not willing to do the customary job of washing the feet of upper caste men, clear the left-overs after the marriage feast and wash the utensils.  Assuming that the facts given above are correct, you have to decide: Does this case involve violation of Fundamental Rights? What would you order the government to do in this case? Indian Constitution at Work Does it mean that in some cases someone s life can be taken away by law? That sounds strange. Can you think of an example? RIGHT TO FREEDOM Equality and freedom or liberty, are the two rights that are most essential to a democracy. It is not possible to think of the one without thinking of the other. Liberty means freedom of thought, expression and action. However it does not mean freedom to do anything that one desires or likes. If that were to be permitted then a large number of people will not be able to enjoy their freedom. Therefore, freedoms are defined in such a manner that every person will enjoy her freedom without threatening freedom of others and without endangering the law and order Right to life and personal liberty The foremost right among rights to freedom is the right to life and personal liberty. No citizen can be denied his or her life except by procedure as laid down under the law. Similarly no one can be denied his/her personal liberty. That means no one can be arrested without being told the grounds for such an arrest. If arrested, the person has the right to defend himself by a lawyer of his choice. Also, it is mandatory for the police to take that person to the nearest magistrate within 24 hours. The magistrate, who is not part of the police, will decide whether the arrest is justified or not. This right is not just confined to a guarantee against taking away of an individual s life but has wider application. Various judgments of Supreme Court have expanded the scope of this right. The Supreme Court Article 21: Protection of life and personal liberty No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution has ruled that this right also includes right to live with human dignity, free from exploitation. The court has held that right to shelter and livelihood is also included in the right to life because no person can live without the means of living, that is, the means of livelihood. Ordinarily, a person would be arrested after he or she has reportedly committed some offence. However there are exceptions to this. Sometimes a person can be arrested simply out of an apprehension that he or she is likely to engage in unlawful activity and imprisoned for some time without following the above mentioned procedure. This is known as preventive detention. It means that if the government feels that a person can be a threat to law and order or to the peace and security of the nation, it can detain or arrest that person. This preventive detention can be extended only for three months. After three months such a case is brought before an advisory board for On the face of it, preventive detention looks like an effective tool in the hands of the government to deal with anti-social elements or subversives. But this provision has often been misused by the government. Many people think that there must be greater safeguards in this law so that it may not be misused against people for reasons other than that which are really justified. In fact, there is a clear tension between right to life and personal liberty and the provision for preventive detention. You can see that under the right to freedom there are some other rights as well. These rights however are not absolute. Each of these is subject to restrictions imposed by the government. For example right to freedom of speech and expression is subject to restrictions such as public order, peace and morality etc. Freedom to assemble too is to be exercised peacefully and without arms. The government may impose restrictions in certain areas declaring the assembly of five or more persons as unlawful. Such powers can be easily misused by the administration. The genuine protest against an act or policy of government by the people may be denied Indian Constitution at Work permission. However, if the people are aware and vigilant in regard to their rights and choose to protest against such acts of administration such misuse becomes rare.  In the Constituent Assembly itself, some members had expressed their dissatisfaction about restrictions on rights. Rights of accused Our Constitution ensures that persons accused of various offences would also get sufficient protection. We often tend to believe that anyone who is charged with some offence is guilty. However, no one is guilty unless the court has found that person guilty of an offence. It is also necessary that a person accused of any crime should get adequate opportunity to defend herself or himself. To ensure a fair trial in courts, the Constitution has provided three rights: no person would be punished for the same offence more than no law shall declare any action as illegal from a backdate, no person shall be asked to give evidence against himself or  I feel that many of these fundamental rights have been framed from the point of view of a police constable  you will find that very minimum rights have been conceded and are almost invariably followed by a proviso. Almost every article is followed by a proviso which takes away the right almost  What should be our conception of incorporate every one of those rights which our people want to get.  CAD, Vol. III, p. 404, 29 April 1947 Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution RIGHT AGAINST EXPLOITATION In our country there are millions of people who are underprivileged and deprived. They may be subjected to exploitation by their fellow human exploitation in our country has been begar or forced labour without payment. Another closely related form of exploitation is buying and selling of human beings and using them as slaves. Both of these are prohibited under the Constitution. Forced labour was imposed by landlords, moneylenders and other wealthy persons in the past. Some form of bonded labour still continues in the country, specially in brick kiln work.  It has now been declared a crime and it is Check your progress Do you think that the following situations demand restrictions on right to freedom? Give reasons to support People have assembled for a peace march after communal riots in the city. b. Dalits are denied entry in a temple. A march is being organised to forcibly enter the temple. Hundreds of Adivasis blocked the road demanding that the land taken away from them for an industry d. A caste panchayat is meeting to decide the punishment to a young couple for marrying outside Name the fundamental rights whose violation is depicted in this Indian Constitution at Work The Constitution also forbids employment of children below the age of 14 years in dangerous jobs like factories and mines. With child labour being made illegal and right to education becoming a fundamental right for children, this right against exploitation has become more meaningful. RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION According to our Constitution, everyone enjoys the right to follow the religion of his or her choice.  This freedom is considered as a hallmark of democracy. Historically, there were rulers and emperors in different parts of the world who did not allow residents of their countries to enjoy the right to freedom of religion. Persons following a religion different from that of the ruler were either persecuted or forced to convert to the official religion of the rulers. Therefore, democracy has always incorporated the freedom to follow the religion of one s choice as one of its basic principles. Freedom of faith and worship In India, everyone is free to choose a religion and practice that religion. Freedom of religion also includes the freedom of conscience. This means that a person may choose any religion or may choose not to follow any religion. Freedom of religion includes the freedom to profess, follow and propagate any religion. Freedom of religion is subject to certain limitations. The government can impose restrictions on the practice of freedom of religion in order to protect public order, morality and health. This means that the freedom of religion is not an unlimited right. The government can interfere in religious matters for rooting out certain social evils. For example in the past, the government has taken steps banning practices like sati, bigamy or human sacrifice. Such restrictions cannot be opposed in the name of interference in right to freedom of religion. The limitations on the right to freedom of religion always produce tensions between followers of various religions and the government. When the government seeks to restrict some activities of any religious group, people of that religion feel that this is interference in their Freedom of religion becomes a matter of political controversy for yet another reason. The Constitution has guaranteed the right to propagate one s religion. This includes persuading people to Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution convert from one religion to another. However, some people resent conversions on the ground that these are based on intimidation or inducement. The Constitution does not allow forcible conversions. It only gives us the right to spread information about our religion and thus attract others to it. Equality of all religions Being a country which is home to several religions, it is necessary that the government must extend equal treatment to different religions. Negatively, it means that government will not favour any particular religion. India does not have any official religion. We don t have to belong to any particular religion in order to be a prime minister or president or judge or any other public official. We have also seen that under the right to equality, there is a guarantee that government will not discriminate on the basis of religion in giving employment. The institutions run by the state will not preach any religion or give religious education nor will they favour persons of any religion. The objective of these provisions is to sustain and nurture the principle of secularism. Make a list of public religious activities that take place in your village or city. Which of these involve an exercise of right to religious Discuss what could have happened if this right was not available to people in your locality. CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS When we talk of the Indian society, the image of diversity comes before our minds. India is not made up of a monolithic society. We are a society that has vast diversity. In such a society that is full of diversity, there would be social sections which are small in numbers compared to some other groups. If a group is in minority, will it have to adopt the culture of the majority? Our Constitution believes that diversity is our strength. Therefore, one of the fundamental rights is the right of the minorities to maintain their culture. This minority status is not dependent only Indian Constitution at Work upon religion. Linguistic and cultural minorities are also included in this provision. Minorities are groups that have common language or religion and in a particular part of the country or in the country as a whole, they are outnumbered by some other social section. Such communities have a culture, language and a script of their own, and have the right to conserve and develop these. All minorities, religious or linguistic, can set up their own educational institutions. By doing so, they can preserve and develop their own culture. The government will not, while granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any educational institution on the basis that it is under the management of minority RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES One would agree that our Constitution contains a very impressive list of Fundamental Rights. But merely writing down a list of rights is not enough. There has to be a way through which they could be realised in practice and defended against any attack on these rights.  A heavy responsibility would be cast on the majority to see that in fact the minorities feel secure.   the only safety for the minorities lies in a secular State. It pays them to be nationalists...The majority community should not boast of their national outlook....They should try to place themselves in the position of the minorities and try to appreciate their fears. All demands for safeguards...are the products of those fears that the minorities have in their minds,...as regards their language, their script and also about the services.  Sardar Hukam Singh CAD, VIII, p. 322, 26 May 1949 Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution Right to constitutional remedies is the means through which this is to be achieved. Dr. Ambedkar considered the right to constitutional remedies as  heart and soul of the constitution. It is so because this right gives a citizen the right to approach a High Court or the Supreme Court to get any of the fundamental rights restored in case of their violation. The Supreme Court and the High Courts can issue orders and give directives to the government for the enforcement of rights. The courts can issue various special orders known as Habeas corpus: A writ of habeas corpus means that the court orders that the arrested person should be presented before it. It can also order to set free an arrested person if the manner or grounds of arrest are not lawful or satisfactory. Mandamus: This writ is issued when the court finds that a particular office holder is not doing legal duty and thereby is infringing on the right of Prohibition: This writ is issued by a higher court (High Court or Supreme Court) when a lower court has considered a case going beyond its jurisdiction. Quo Warranto: If the court finds that a person is holding office but is not entitled to hold that office, it issues the writ of quo warranto and restricts that person from acting as an office holder. Certiorari: Under this writ, the court orders a lower court or another authority to transfer a matter pending before it to the higher authority or Apart from the judiciary, many other mechanisms have been created in later years for the protection of rights. You may have heard about the National Commission on Minorities, the National Commission on Women, the National Commission on Scheduled Castes, I am in minority in my locality but majority in the town, minority if you look at my language but majority if you go by my religion  Aren t we all Indian Constitution at Work etc. These institutions protect the rights of women, minorities or Dalits. Besides, the National Human Rights Commission has also been established by law to protect the fundamental and other kinds National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) The real test of the rights given by any constitution is in their actual implementation. The poor, illiterate and the deprived sections of the society must be able to exercise their rights. Independent organisations like the People s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) or People s Union for Democratic Rights (PUDR) have been working as watchdogs against the violations of rights. In this background, the government has established in 1993 an institution, the National Human Rights Commission. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) is composed of a former chief justice of the Supreme Court of India, a former judge of the Supreme Court, a former chief justice of a High Court and two other members who have knowledge and practical experience in matters relating to human rights. The Commission s functions include inquiry at its own initiative or on a petition presented to it by a victim into complaint of violation of human rights; visit to jails to study the condition of the inmates; undertaking and promoting research in the field of human rights, etc. The Commission receives complaints in thousands every year. These relate to custodial death, custodial rape, disappearances, police excesses, failure in taking action, indignity to women, etc. Its most significant intervention has been on disappeared youth in Punjab and investigation and trial of Gujarat riot cases where its intervention proved effective. The Commission does not have the power of prosecution. It can merely make recommendations to the government or recommend to the courts to initiate proceedings based on the inquiry that it conducts. For more details, visit http://www.nhrc.nic.in Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY The makers of our Constitution knew that independent India was going to face many challenges. Foremost among these was the challenge to bring about equality and well-being of all citizens. They also thought that certain policy direction was required for handling these problems. At the same time, the Constitution did not want future governments to be bound by certain policy decisions. Therefore, some guidelines were incorporated in the Constitution but they were not made legally enforceable: this means that if a government did not implement a particular guideline, we cannot go to the court asking the court to instruct the government to implement that policy. Thus, these guidelines are  non-justiciable  i.e., parts of the Constitution that cannot be enforced by the judiciary. Those who framed our Constitution thought that the moral force behind these guidelines would ensure that the government would take them seriously. Besides, they expected that the people would also hold the governments responsible for implementing these directives. So, a separate list of policy guidelines is included in the Constitution. The list of these guidelines is called the Directive Principles of State What do the Directive Principles contain? The chapter on Directive Principles lists mainly three things: the goals and objectives that we as a society should adopt; certain rights that individuals should enjoy apart from the Fundamental Rights; and certain policies that the government should adopt. You may get some idea of the vision of makers of our Constitution by looking at some of the Directive Principles shown below. The governments from time to time tried to give effect to some Directive Principles of State Policy. They passed several zamindari abolition bills, nationalised banks, enacted numerous factory laws, fixed minimum wages, cottage and small industries were promoted and provisions for reservation for the uplift of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes were made. Such efforts to give effect to the Indian Constitution at Work Directive Principles include the right to education, formation of panchayati raj institutions all over the country, partial right to work under employment guarantee programme and the mid-day meal Check your progress It is estimated that there are about three million urban homeless in India. Night shelters are not available for more than five per cent of this population. Hundreds of these old, sick homeless people are killed by cold wave during winter. They cannot have ration and voting cards in the absence of any  proof of residence. Without these documents they also cannot avail government help as needy patients. A large number of these homeless people are casual workers, who earn very low wages. They travel to the city in search of work from different parts of the country. Use these facts to write a petition to the Supreme Court of India under the Right to Constitutional Remedies. Your petition What Fundamental Rights are being denied to the homeless in their everyday life? b. What kind of order would you request the Supreme Court Fundamental Duties of citizens In 1976, the 42nd amendment to the Constitution was passed. Among other things, this amendment inserted a list of Fundamental Duties of Citizens. In all, ten duties were enumerated. However, the Constitution does not say anything about enforcing these duties. As citizens, we must abide by the Constitution, defend our country, promote harmony among all citizens, protect However, it must be noted that our Constitution does not make the enjoyment of rights dependent or conditional upon fulfilment of duties. In this sense, the inclusion of fundamental duties has not changed the status of our fundamental rights. Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND It is possible to see both Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles as complementary to each other. Fundamental Rights restrain the government from doing certain things while Directive Welfare of the people; Social, economic and political Raising the standard of living; equitable distribution Promotion of international Equal pay for equal work for men and women; Right against economic Right to work; Early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years Uniform civil code; Prohibition of consumption of alcoholic liquor; Promotion of cottage Prevention of slaughter of Promotion of village Tell me what is the point of saying nice things in the Constitution if these cannot be implemented by any court? Indian Constitution at Work Principles exhort the government to do certain things. Fundamental Rights mainly protect the rights of individuals while directive principles ensure the well-being of the entire society. However, at times, when government intends to implement Directive Principles of State Policy, it can come in conflict with the Fundamental Rights of the citizen. This problem arose when the government sought to pass laws to abolish zamindari system. These measures were opposed on the ground that they violated right to property. However, keeping in mind the societal needs that are greater than the individual interests, the government amended the Constitution to give effect to the Directive Principles of State Policy. This led to a long legal battle. The executive and the judiciary took different positions. The government claimed that rights can be abridged for giving effect to Directive Principles. This argument assumed that rights were a hindrance to welfare of the people. On the other hand, the court held the view that Fundamental Rights were so important and sacred that they cannot be limited even for purposes of implementing Directive Principles. Right to Property Behind the controversy about the relationship between rights and directive principles, there was one important reason: in the Constitution, originally, there was a fundamental right to  acquire, possess and maintain  property. But the Constitution made it clear that property could be taken away by the government for public welfare. Since 1950, government made many laws that limited this right to property. This right was at the centre of the long debate over the relationship between rights and directive principles. Finally, in 1973, the Supreme Court gave a decision that the right to property was not part of the basic structure of the Constitution and therefore, parliament had power to abridge this right by an amendment. In 1978, the 44th amendment to the Constitution removed the right to property from the list of Fundamental Rights and converted it into a simple legal right under article 300 A. What difference, do you think, this change of status makes to the right to property? Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution This generated another complicated debate. This related to the amendment of the Constitution. The government was saying that Parliament can amend any part of the Constitution. The court was saying that Parliament cannot make an amendment that violated Fundamental Rights. This controversy was settled by an important decision of the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati case. In this case, the court said that there are certain basic features of the Constitution and these cannot be changed by Parliament. We shall discuss this in greater detail in Chapter 9 on  Constitution as a Living Indian Constitution at Work In the writings of Jotirao Phuley (1827-1890), a radical social reformer from Maharashtra, we find one of the earliest expressions of the view that rights include both freedom and equality. During the national movement, this idea of rights was further sharpened and expanded to constitutional rights. Our Constitution reflected this long tradition and listed the fundamental rights. Since 1950, the judiciary has functioned as an important protector of rights. Judicial interpretations have expanded the scope of rights in many respects. The government and administration of our country function within this overall framework. Rights enforce limitations on the functioning of the government and ensure democratic governance of the country. Check your progress Read the main points of the Bill of Rights in the South African Constitution and the Directive Principles in India. Which are the common points in the two lists? Why did the South African Constitution put these in the Bill of Rights? If you were writing the constitution for a new country, what would you suggest? Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution Write true or false against each of these statements: A Bill of Rights lays down the rights enjoyed by the people of a A Bill of Rights protects the liberties of an individual. Every country of the world has a Bill of Rights. The Constitution guarantees remedy against violation of Rights. Which of the following is the best description of Fundamental Rights? All the rights an individual should have. All the rights given to citizens by law. The rights given and protected by the Constitution. The rights given by the Constitution that cannot ever be Read the following situations. Which Fundamental Right is being used or violated in each case and how? Overweight male cabin crew are allowed to get promotion in the national airlines but their women colleagues who gain weight A director makes a documentary film that criticises the policies of the government. People displaced by a big dam take out a rally demanding Andhra society runs Telugu medium schools outside Andhra Which of the following is a correct interpretation of the Cultural and Educational Rights? Only children belonging to the minority group that has opened educational institution can study there. Government schools must ensure that children of the minority group will be introduced to their belief and culture. Linguistic and religious minorities can open schools for their children and keep it reserved for them. Linguistic and religious minorities can demand that their children must not study in any educational institution except those managed by their own community. Indian Constitution at Work 5. Which of the following is a violation of Fundamental Rights and Not paying minimum wages Banning of a book Banning of loudspeakers after 9 pm. Making a speech 6. An activist working among the poor says that the poor don t need Fundamental Rights. What they need are Directive Principles to be made legally binding. Do you agree with this? Give your reasons. 7. Several reports show that caste groups previously associated with scavenging are forced to continue in this job. Those in positions of authority refuse to give them any other job. Their children are discouraged from pursuing education. Which of their Fundamental Rights are being violated in this instance? 8. A petition by a human rights group drew attention of the court to the condition of starvation and hunger in the country. Over five crore tonnes of food grains was stored in the godowns of the Food Corporation of India. Research shows that a large number of ration cardholders do not know about the quantity of food grains they can purchase from fair price shops. It requested the court to order the government to improve its public distribution system. Which different rights does this case involve? How are these Should these rights form part of the right to life? 9. Read the statement by Somnath Lahiri in the Constitutent Assembly quoted in this chapter. Do you agree with him? If yes, give instances to prove it. If not, give arguments against his position. 10. Which of the Fundamental Rights is in your opinion the most important right? Summarise its provisions and give arguments to show why it is most important. Chapter 3: Election and Representation Have you ever played chess? What would happen if the black knight suddenly started moving straight rather than two and a half squares? Or, what would happen if in a game of cricket, there were no umpires? In any sport, we need to follow certain rules. Change the rules and the outcome of the game would be very different. Similarly a game needs an impartial umpire whose decision is accepted by all the players. The rules and the umpire have to be agreed upon before we begin to play a game. What is true of a game is also true of elections. There are different rules or systems of conducting elections. The outcome of the election depends on the rules we have adopted. We need some machinery to conduct the elections in an impartial manner. Since these two decisions need to be taken before the game of electoral politics can begin, these cannot be left to any government. That is why these basic decisions about elections are written down in the constitution of a democratic country. In this chapter we shall study the constitutional provisions regarding elections and representation. We shall focus on the importance of the method of election chosen in our Constitution and the implications of the constitutional provisions regarding impartial machinery for conducting elections. We shall also look at some suggestions for amending the constitutional provisions in this respect. After reading this chapter, you would understand:   different methods of election;   the characteristics of the system of election adopted in our country;   the importance of the provisions for free and fair elections; and   the debate on electoral reforms. Indian Constitution at Work ELECTIONS AND DEMOCRACY Let us begin by asking ourselves two simple questions about elections Can we have democracy without holding elections? Can we hold elections without having democracy? Let us have a discussion in the classroom on both these questions by using examples from whatever we have learnt so far in the previous The first question reminds us of the necessity of representation in a large democracy. All citizens cannot take direct part in making every decision. Therefore, representatives are elected by the people. This is how elections become important.  Whenever we think of India as a invariably turns to the last elections. Elections have today become the most visible symbol of the democratic process.  We often distinguish between direct and indirect democracy is one where the citizens directly participate in the day-to-day decision- making and in the running of the government. The ancient city-states in Greece were considered examples of direct democracy. Many would consider local governments, especially gram sabhas, to be the closest examples of direct They say elections are carnival of democracy. But this cartoon depicts chaos instead. Is this true of elections always? Is it good for democracy? READ A CARTOON Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 17 February 1957 Chapter 3: Election and Representation democracy. But this kind of direct democracy cannot be practiced when a decision has to be taken by lakhs and crores of people. That is why rule by the people usually means rule by people s representatives. In such an arrangement citizens choose their representatives who, in turn, are actively involved in governing and administering the country. The method followed to choose these representatives is referred to as an election. Thus, the citizens have a limited role in taking major decisions and in running the administration. They are not very actively involved in making of the policies. Citizens are involved only indirectly, through their elected representatives. In this arrangement, where all major decisions are taken by elected representatives, the method by which people elect their representatives becomes very The second question reminds us of the fact that not all elections are democratic. A large number of non- democratic countries also hold elections. In fact non- democratic rulers are very keen to present themselves as democratic. They do so by holding election in such a way that it does not threaten their rule. Can you think of some examples of such non-democratic elections? What do you think would distinguish a democratic from a non- democratic election? What can be done to ensure that elections in a country would be conducted in a This is where constitution comes in. The constitution of a democratic country lays down some basic rules about elections. The details are usually left to be worked out by laws passed by the legislatures. These basic rules are Who is eligible to vote? Who is eligible to contest? Who is to supervise elections? How do the voters choose their representatives? How are the votes to be counted and What is the need of writing these rules in the constitution? Why can t these be decided by the Parliament? Or by all the parties before every election? Indian Constitution at Work Like most democratic constitutions, the Constitution of India answers all these questions. As you can see, the first three questions are about ensuring that elections are free and fair and can thus be called democratic. The last two questions are about ensuring a fair representation. In this chapter you will consider both these aspects of the Constitutional provisions about elections. ELECTION SYSTEM IN INDIA You may have noted above a reference to different methods or the systems of elections. You may have wondered what these were all about. You may have seen or read about different methods of electioneering or campaigning in the elections. But what are different methods of elections? There is a system of conducting elections. There are authorities and rules about do s and don ts. Is that what election system is all about? You may have wondered why the constitution needs to write down how the votes are to be counted and representatives elected. Isn t that very obvious? People go and vote. The candidate who gets highest votes gets elected. That is what elections are all over the world. Why do we need to think about it? We need to, because this question is not as simple as it appears to us. We have got so used to our system of elections that we think that there cannot be any other way. In a democratic election, people vote and their preference decides who will win the contest. But there Collect newspaper clippings about elections in India and any other country. Classify the clippings in the System of representation b. Voter eligibility Role of the Election Commission. If you have access to internet, visit the websites of the Election Commission of India, https://eci.gov.in, and ACE project, The Electoral Knowledge Network, http://aceproject.org and collect the information mentioned above for at least four countries. Chapter 3: Election and Representation can be very different ways in which people make their choices and very different ways in which their preferences can be counted. These different rules of the game can make a difference to who the winner of the game will be. Some rules can favour bigger parties; some rules can help the smaller players. Some rules can favour the majority community, others can protect the minorities. Let us look at one dramatic instance to see how this happens. First Past the Post System Look at the newspaper clipping. Hold mock elections in your class to elect four class representatives. Hold the election in three different ways: Each student can give one vote.  The four highest vote getters Each student has four votes and can give them all to one candidate or split the votes among different candidates. The four highest vote getters are elected. Each voter gives a preference ranking to candidates and the counting follows the method of election of Rajya Sabha members described below. Did the same four persons win the election in each of these methods? If not, what was the difference? Why? Indian Constitution at Work It talks of one historic moment in India s democracy. In the Lok Sabha elections of 1984, the Congress party came to power winning 415 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats   more than 80% of the seats. Such a victory was never achieved by any party in the Lok Sabha. What did this The Congress party won four-fifths of the seats. Does it mean that four out of five Indian voters voted for the Congress party? Actually not. Take a look at the enclosed table. The Congress party got 48% of the votes. This means that only 48% of those who voted, voted in favour of the candidates put up by the Congress party, but the party still managed to win more than 80% of the seats in the Lok Sabha.  Look at the performance of other parties. The BJP got 7.4 per cent votes but less than one per cent seats. How did that happen? Less than 50 per cent votes and more than 80 per cent seats! Isn t that unfair? How could our Constitution makers accept such an unfair system? Votes and seats won by some major parties in Lok Sabha Election of 1984 This happened because in our country we follow a special method of elections. Under this system: The entire country is divided into 543 constituencies; Each constituency elects one representative; and The candidate who secures the highest number of votes in that constituency is declared elected. It is important to note that in this system whoever has Chapter 3: Election and Representation more votes than all other candidates, is declared elected. The winning candidate need not secure a majority of the votes. This method is called the First Past the Post (FPTP) system. In the electoral race, the candidate who is ahead of others, who crosses the winning post first of all, is the winner. This method is also called the Plurality System. This is the method of election prescribed by the Let us now go back to our example. The Congress party won greater share of seats than its share of votes because in many of the  constituencies in which its candidates won, they secured less than 50% of the votes. If there are several candidates, the winning candidate often gets much less than 50% of the votes. The votes that go to all the losing candidates go  waste, for those candidates or parties get no seat from those votes. Suppose a party gets only 25 per cent of the votes in every constituency, but everyone else gets even less votes. In that case, the party could win all the seats with only 25 per cent votes or even less. Let us compare this to how elections take place in Israel that follows a very different system of elections. In Israel once the votes are counted, each party is allotted the share of seats in the parliament in proportion to its share of votes (see Box). Each party fills its quota of seats by picking those many of its nominees from a preference list that has been declared before the elections. This system of elections is called the Proportional Representation (PR) system. In this system a party gets the same proportion of seats as its proportion of votes. In the PR system there could be two variations. In some countries, like Israel or Netherlands, the entire country is treated as one constituency and seats are allocated to each party according to its share of votes in the national election. The other method is when the country is divided into several multi-member This is very confusing! How do I know who is my MP or my MLA in this system? Who would I go to if I have any Indian Constitution at Work constituencies as in Argentina and Portugal. Each party prepares a list of candidates for each constituency, depending on how many have to be elected from that constituency. In both these variations, voters exercise their preference for a party and not a candidate. The seats in a constituency are distributed on the basis of votes polled by a party. Thus, representatives from a constituency, would and do belong to different parties. In India, we have adopted PR system Proportional Representation in Israel Israel follows proportional representation system of election. Elections to the legislature (Knesset) take place every four years. Every party declares a list of its candidates, but voters vote for the party and not for the candidates. A party gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the votes polled by it. This allows even smaller parties with very small support base to get representation in the legislature. (A party must get a minimum of 3.25% votes to be eligible to get seats in the legislature.)  This often leads to a multi-party coalition government. The following table shows the result of the 2015 elections to the Knesset. Based on this, you can find out what percentage of seats various parties got in that election. Name of List (Party) % of total Number of % of total Joint List (Hadash, National Democratic Assembly, Arab Movement for Renewal, United Arab List) United Torah Judaism Chapter 3: Election and Representation on a limited scale for indirect elections. The Constitution prescribes a third and complex variation of the PR system for the election of President, Vice President, and for the election to the Rajya Sabha and Vidhan Parishads. Comparison of FPTP and PR system of election The country is divided Large geographical  areas into small geographical are demarcated as units called constituencies constituencies. The entire country may be a single Every constituency elects More than one representative may be elected from one Voter votes for a candidate Voter votes for the party A party may get more seats Every party gets seats in the than votes in the legislature legislature in proportion to the percentage of votes that it gets Candidate who wins the Candidate who wins the election may not get elections gets majority of majority (50%+1) votes Examples: U.K., India Indian Constitution at Work How does PR work in Rajya Sabha elections A third variant of PR, the Single Transferable Vote system (STV), is followed for Rajya Sabha elections. Every State has a specific quota of seats in the Rajya Sabha. The members are elected by the respective State legislative assemblies. The voters are the MLAs in that State. Every voter is required to rank candidates according to her or his preference. To be declared the winner, a candidate must secure a minimum quota of votes, which is determined by a formula: Total votes polled Total number of candidates to be elected +1 For example if 4 Rajya Sabha members have to be elected by the 200 MLAs in Rajasthan, the winner would require (200/4+1= 40+1) 41 votes. When the votes are counted it is done on the basis of first preference votes secured by each candidate, of which the candidate has secured the first preference votes. If after the counting of all first preference votes, required number of candidates fail to fulfil the quota, the candidate who secured the lowest votes of first preference is eliminated and his/her votes are transferred to those who are mentioned as second preference on those ballot papers. This process continues till the required number of candidates are Why did India adopt the FPTP system? The answer is not very difficult to guess. If you have carefully read the box explaining the Rajya Sabha elections, you would have noticed that it is a complicated system which may work in a small country, but would be difficult to work in a sub-continental country like India. The reason for the popularity and success of the FPTP system is its simplicity. The entire election system is extremely simple to understand even for common voters who may have no specialised Chapter 3: Election and Representation knowledge about politics and elections.  There is also a clear choice presented to the voters at the time of elections. Voters have to simply endorse a candidate or a party while voting. Depending on the nature of actual politics, voters may either give greater importance to the party or to the candidate or balance the two.  The FPTP system offers voters a choice not simply between parties but specific candidates. In other electoral systems, especially PR systems, voters are often asked to choose a party and the representatives are elected on the basis of party lists. As a result, there is no one representative who represents and is responsible for one locality. In constituency based system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representative is and can hold him or her accountable. More importantly, the makers of our Constitution also felt that PR based election may not be suitable for giving a stable government in a parliamentary system. We shall study the nature of parliamentary system of executive in the next chapter. This system requires that the executive has majority in the legislature. You will notice that the PR system may not produce a clear majority because seats in the legislature would be divided on the basis of share of votes. The FPTP READ A CARTOON These members of the ruling party are trying to listen to the  tiny  opposition! Was this the effect of our electoral system? Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 29 May 1949 Indian Constitution at Work system generally gives the largest party or coalition some extra bonus seats, more than their share of votes would allow. Thus this system makes it possible for parliamentary government to function smoothly and effectively by facilitating the formation of a stable government. Finally, the FPTP system encourages voters from different social groups to come together to win an election in a locality. In a diverse country like India, a PR system would encourage each community to form its own nation-wide party. This may also have been at the back of the mind of our constitution makers. The experience of the working of the Constitution has confirmed the expectation of the constitution makers. The FPTP system has proved to be simple and familiar to ordinary voters. It has helped larger parties to win clear majorities at the centre and the State level. The system has also discouraged political parties that get all their Check your progress Here are the results of the Tamil Nadu Assembly Election held in 2016. What would be the composition of the Assembly if it was a PR system like in Israel? Which party would have a majority? Who would form the government? What would be the effect of this system on the relationship of political parties? Total Seats: 234 (Election held in 232) % of total Seats in PR Chapter 3: Election and Representation votes only from one caste or community. Normally, the working of the FPTP system results in a two-party system. This means that there are two major competitors for power and power is often shared by these two parties alternately. It is difficult for new parties or the third party to enter the competition and share power. In this respect, the experience of FPTP in India is slightly different. After independence, though we adopted the FPTP system, there emerged a one party dominance and along with it, there existed many smaller parties. After 1989, India is witnessing the functioning of the multi- party coalitions. At the same time, gradually, in many States, a two- party competition is emerging. But the distinguishing feature of India s party system is that the rise of coalitions has made it possible for new and smaller parties to enter into electoral competition in spite of the FPTP system. RESERVATION OF CONSTITUENCIES We have noticed that in the FPTP election system, the candidate who secures the highest votes in a particular constituency is declared elected. This often works to the disadvantage of the smaller social groups. This is even more significant in the Indian social context. We have had a history of caste-based discrimination. In such a social system, the FPTP electoral system can mean that the dominant social groups and castes can win everywhere and the oppressed social groups may continue to remain unrepresented.  Our Constitution makers were aware of this difficulty and the need to provide a way to ensure fair and just representation to the oppressed social groups. This issue was debated even before independence and the British government had introduced  separate electorates. This system meant Tajamul Husain, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 333, 26 May 1949  Separate electorates have been a curse to India, have done incalculable harm to this country  Separate electorates have barred our progress  We (Muslims) want to merge in the nation....for God s sake keep your hands off reservation for the Muslim Indian Constitution at Work that for electing a representative from a particular community, only those voters would be eligible who belong to that community. In the Constituent Assembly, many members expressed a fear that this will not suit our purposes. Therefore, it was decided to adopt the system of reserved constituencies. In this system, all voters in a constituency are eligible to vote but the candidates must belong to only a particular community or social section for which the seat is There are certain social groups which may be spread across the country. In a particular constituency, their numbers may not be sufficient to be able to influence a victory of a candidate.  However, taken across the country they are a significantly sizeable group. To ensure their proper representation, a system of reservation becomes necessary. The Constitution provides for reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This provision was made initially for a period of 10 years and as a result of successive constitutional amendments, has been extended up to 2030. The Parliament can take a decision to further extend it, when the period of reservation expires. The number of seats reserved for both of these groups is in proportion to their share in the population of India. Of the 543 elected seats in the Lok Sabha, 84 are reserved for Scheduled Castes and 47 are reserved for Scheduled Tribes (as on 26 January 2019).  But I have come to say a few words on behalf of the Adivasis of India. In the past, thanks to the major political parties, thanks to the British Government and thanks to every enlightened Indian citizen, we have been isolated and kept, as it were, in a zoo....We are willing to mix with you, and it is for that reason,..., that we have insisted on a reservation of seats as far as the Legislatures are concerned. We have not asked...(for) separate electorates;...Under the 1935 Act, throughout the Legislatures in India, there were altogether only 24 Adivasi MLAs out of a total of 1585,  and not a single representative at the Centre.  Jaipal Singh, CAD, Vol. V, pp. 209-210, 27 August 1947 Chapter 3: Election and Representation Who decides which constituency is to be reserved? On what basis is this decision taken? This decision is taken by an independent body called the Delimitation Commission. The Delimitation Commission is appointed by the President of India and works in collaboration with the Election Commission of India.  It is appointed for the purpose of drawing up the boundaries of constituencies all over the country. A quota of constituencies to be reserved in each State is fixed depending on the proportion of SC or ST in that State. After drawing the boundaries, the Delimitation Commission looks at the composition of population in each constituency. Those constituencies that have the highest proportion of Scheduled Tribe population are reserved for ST. In the case of Scheduled Castes, the Delimitation Commission looks at two things. It picks constituencies that have higher proportion of Scheduled Caste population. But it also spreads these constituencies in different regions of the State.  This is done because the Scheduled Caste population is generally spread evenly throughout the country. These reserved constituencies can be rotated each time the Delimitation exercise is undertaken. The Constitution does not make similar reservation for other disadvantaged groups. Of late there has been a strong demand seeking reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies for women. Given the fact that very few women are elected to representative bodies, the demand for reserving one-third seats for women was articulated for many years. Reservation of seats for women has already been provided for rural and urban local bodies. We shall discuss this in chapter on Local Governments. A similar provision for Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabhas has been provided through the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam (Women's Reservation The true test of any election system is its ability to ensure a free and fair electoral process. If we want democracy to be translated into reality on the ground, it is important that the election system is impartial and transparent. The system of election must also allow the aspirations of the voter to find legitimate expression through the Indian Constitution at Work Universal franchise and right to contest Apart from laying down a method of elections,  the Constitution answers two basic questions about elections: Who are the voters? Who can contest elections? In both these respects our Constitution follows the well established You already know that democratic elections require that all adult citizens of the country must be eligible to vote in the elections. This is known as universal adult franchise. In many countries, citizens had to fight long battles with the rulers to get this right. In many countries, women could get this right very late and only after struggle.  One of the important decisions of the framers of the Indian Constitution was to guarantee every adult citizen in India, the right to vote. Till 1989, an adult Indian meant an Indian citizen above the age of 21. An amendment to the Constitution in 1989, reduced the eligibility age to 18. Adult franchise ensures that all citizens are able to participate in the Check your progress The proportion of Muslims in the population of India is about 14.2 per cent. But the number of Muslim MPs in the Lok Sabha has usually been less than 6 per cent, less than half of their share in population. A similar situation prevails in most State Assemblies. Three students drew different conclusions from this fact. Write down whether and why you agree or disagree with each of them. Hilal: This demonstrates the unfairness of the FPTP system. We should have opted for PR system. Arif: This shows the wisdom of granting reservations to SC and ST. What is needed is a reservation of seats for Muslims on the same lines as for SC and ST. Saba: There is no point in talking about Muslims as a whole. Muslim women are not going to get any share in any of these systems. We need a separate quota for Muslim women. Am I or am I not an adult? I am mature enough to choose my future career, old enough to get a driving license, but not old enough to vote! If laws can apply to me, why can t I decide on who makes those Chapter 3: Election and Representation process of selecting their representative. This is consistent with the principle of equality and non-discrimination that we studied in the chapter on rights. Many people thought and many think so today that giving the right to vote to educational qualification was not right. But our Constitution makers had a firm belief in the ability and worth of all adult citizens as equals in the matter of deciding what is good for the society, the country and for their What is true of the right to vote is also true of right to contest election. All citizens have the right to stand for election and become the representative of the people. However, there are different minimum age requirements for contesting elections. For example, in order to stand for Lok Sabha or Assembly election, a candidate must be at least 25 years old. There are some other restrictions also. For instance, there is a legal provision that a person who has undergone imprisonment for two or more years for some offence is disqualified from contesting elections. But there are no restrictions of income, education or class or gender on the right to contest elections. In this sense, our system of election is open to Independent Election Commission Several efforts have been made in India to ensure the free and fair election system and process. The most important among these is the Why is universal adult franchise compared to an elephant? Is it unmanageable? Or is it like the story in which everyone describes the elephant only by its parts? READ A CARTOON Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 21 October 1951 Indian Constitution at Work creation of an independent Election Commission to  supervise and conduct  elections. Do you know that in many countries, there is an absence of an independent mechanism for conducting elections? Article 324 of the Indian Constitution provides for an independent Election Commission for the  superintendence, direction and control of the electoral roll and the conduct of elections  in India. These words in the Constitution are very important, for they give the Election Commission a decisive role in virtually everything to do with elections. The Supreme Court has agreed with this interpretation of the To assist the Election Commission of India there is a Chief Electoral Officer in every state. The Election Commission is not responsible for the conduct of local body elections. As we shall study in the chapter on Local Government, the State Election Commissioners work independently of the Election Commission of India and each has its own sphere of operation. The Election Commission of India can either be a single member or a multi-member body. Till 1989, the Election Commission was single member. Just before the 1989 general elections, two Election Commissioners were appointed, making the body multi-member. Soon after the elections, the Commission reverted to its single member status. In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again appointed and the Commission became multi-member and has remained multi-member since then. Initially there were many apprehensions about a multi-member Commission. There was a sharp difference of opinion between the then Chief Election Article 324: (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices of President and Vice- President held under this Constitution shall be vested in a Commission (referred to in this Constitution as the Election Commission). Chapter 3: Election and Representation Commissioner and the other Commissioners about who had how much power. The matter had to be settled by the Supreme Court. Now there is a general consensus that a multi-member Election Commission is more appropriate as power is shared and there is greater accountability. The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) presides over the Election Commission, but does not have more powers than the other Election Commissioners. The CEC and the two Election Commissioners have equal powers to take all decisions relating to elections as a collective body.  They are appointed by the President of India on the advice of the Council of Ministers. It is therefore possible for a ruling party to appoint a partisan person to the Commission who might favour them in the elections. This fear has led many to suggest that this procedure should be changed. Many persons have suggested that a different method should be followed that makes consultation with the leader of opposition and the Chief Justice of India necessary for the appointment of CEC and Election Commissioners. The Constitution ensures the security of the tenure of the CEC and Election Commissioners. They are appointed for a six year term or continue till the age of 65, whichever is earlier. The CEC can be removed before the expiry of Has this now been settled? Or can the government go back to a single member Election Constitution allow this game? Special majority means: Two-thirds majority of those present and voting, and Simple majority of the total membership of the House. Let us say that you have to pass a resolution in your class with a special majority. Imagine further that your class has a total student strength of 57. But on the day of voting, only 51 students are present and 50 students participated in voting. When would you say that the resolution has been passed with  special majority  in this situation? In this book you will find mention of  special majority  in at least three other chapters.  One is in the next chapter on Executive, where we discuss the impeachment of the President of India. Find out the other two places where special majority is discussed. Indian Constitution at Work the term, by the President if both Houses of Parliament make such a recommendation with a special majority. This is done to ensure that a ruling party cannot remove a CEC who refuses to favour it in elections. The Election Commissioners can be removed by the President of India. The Election Commission of India has a wide range of functions. It supervises the preparation of up-to-date voters  list. It makes every effort to ensure that the voters  list is free of errors like non- existence of names of registered voters or existence of names of those non-eligible or non-existent. It also determines the timing of elections and prepares the election schedule.  The election schedule includes the notification of elections, date from which nominations can be filed, last date for filing nominations, last date of scrutiny, last date of withdrawal, date of polling and date of counting and declaration of results. During this entire process, the Election Commission has the power to take decisions to ensure a free and fair poll. It can postpone or cancel the election in the entire country or a specific State or constituency on the grounds that the atmosphere is vitiated and therefore, a free and fair election may not be possible.   The Commission also implements a model code of conduct for parties and candidates. It can order a re-poll in a specific constituency. It can also order a recount of votes when it feels that the counting process has not been fully fair and just. The Election Commission accords recognition to political parties and allots symbols to each of them. The Election Commission has very limited staff of its own. It conducts the elections with the help of the administrative machinery. However, once the election process has begun, the commission has control over the administration as far as election related work is concerned. During the election process, the administrative officers of the State and central governments are assigned election related duty and in this respect, the Election Commission has full control over them. The EC can transfer the officers, or stop their transfers; it can take action against them for failing to act in a non-partisan manner. Over the years, the Election Commission of India has emerged as an independent authority which has asserted its powers to ensure fairness in the election process. It has acted in an impartial and unbiased manner in order to protect the sanctity of the electoral process. The record of Election Commission also shows that every Chapter 3: Election and Representation improvement in the functioning of institutions does not require legal or constitutional change. It is widely agreed that the Election Commission is more independent and assertive now than it was till 25 years ago. This is not because the powers and constitutional protection of the Election Commission have increased. The Election Commission has started using more effectively the powers it always had in the Constitution. Since 1951 52, seventeen Lok Sabha elections have been held. Many more State assembly elections and by-elections have been conducted by the Election Commission. The EC has faced many difficult situations such as holding elections in militancy affected areas like Assam, Punjab or Jammu and Kashmir. It has also faced the difficult situation of having to postpone the election process mid-way in 1991 when the ex-Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated during campaigning. In 2002, the Election Commission faced another critical situation when the Gujarat Assembly was dissolved and elections had to be conducted. But the Election unprecedented violence in that State had made it impossible to hold free and fair elections immediately. The Election Commission decided to postpone elections to the State Assembly by a few months. The Supreme Court upheld this decision of the The Netaji is afraid of EC. Why do leaders fear the Election Commission? Is this good READ A CARTOON R K Laxman in The Times of India. Indian Constitution at Work Can we reduce the influence of money and muscle power by changing the law? Does anything change in reality by changing the law? Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Why do you think does the Election Commission have the following powers and privileges? What could have happened if these did not exist? The Commission can issue orders to government employees engaged in any election The government cannot remove the Chief The Commission can cancel an election if it thinks that it was not fair. No system of election can ever be perfect. And in actual election process, there are bound to be many flaws and limitations. Any democratic society has to keep searching for mechanisms to make elections free and fair to the maximum. With the acceptance of adult suffrage, freedom to contest elections, and the establishment of an independent Election Commission, India has tried to make its election process free and fair. However, the experience of the past 72 years has given rise to many suggestions for reforming our election system. The Election Commission, political parties, various independent groups, and many scholars have come up with proposals for electoral reform. Some of these suggestions are about changing the constitutional provisions discussed in this Our system of elections should be changed from the FPTP to some variant of the PR system. This would Chapter 3: Election and Representation ensure that parties get seats, as far as possible, in proportion to the votes they get. There should be a special provision to ensure that at least one- third women are elected to the parliament and assemblies. There should be  stricter provisions to control the role of money in electoral politics. The elections expenses should be paid by the government out of a special fund. Candidates with any criminal case should be barred from contesting elections, even if their appeal is pending before a There should be complete ban on the use of caste and religious appeals in the There should be a law to regulate the functioning of political parties and to ensure that they function in These are but a few suggestions. There is no suggestions. Even if there was a consensus, there are limits to what the laws and formal provisions can do. Free and fair elections can be held only if the candidates, the parties and those involved in the election process agree to abide by the spirit of democratic competition. Apart from legal reforms, there are two other ways of ensuring that elections reflect the expectations and democratic aspirations of the people. One is, of course, that people themselves have to be more READ A CARTOON Should a person accused of a serious crime be barred from contesting elections? R K Laxman in The Times of India. Indian Constitution at Work vigilant, more actively involved in political activities. But there are limits to the extent to which ordinary people can engage in politics on a regular basis. Therefore, it is necessary that various political institutions and voluntary organisations are developed and are active in functioning as watchdog for ensuring free and fair elections. In countries where representative democracy is practiced, elections and the representative character of those elections are crucial factors in making democracy effective and trustworthy. The success of India s election system can be gauged from a number of factors. Our election system has allowed the voters not only to freely choose representatives, but also to change governments peacefully both at the State and national level. Secondly, voters have consistently taken a keen interest in the election process and participated in it. The number of candidates and parties that contest elections is on the rise. Thirdly, the system of election has proved to be accommodative and inclusive. The social composition of our representatives has changed gradually. Now our representatives come from many different social sections, though the number of women legislators has not increased satisfactorily. Fourthly, the election outcome in most parts of the country does not reflect electoral malpractices and rigging. Of course, many attempts at rigging do take place. You must have read about violence, about complaints that voters  names disappear from the voters  list, about intimidation, and so on. Yet, such instances rarely directly affect the outcome of the election. Finally and most importantly, elections have become a part and parcel of our democratic life. No one can imagine a situation where a government would disrespect the verdict of an election. Similarly, no one can imagine that a government would be formed without holding elections. In fact, regularity and periodicity of elections has earned fame for India as a great Chapter 3: Election and Representation All these factors have earned for our election system a respect within and outside the country. The voter in India has gained confidence. The legitimacy of the Election Commission has increased in the eyes of the people.  This vindicates the basic decisions taken by our Constitution makers. If the election process becomes more flawless, we as voters and citizens would be able to share more effectively in this carnival of democracy and make it more meaningful. Which of the following  resembles most a direct democracy? Discussions in a family meeting Election of the class monitor Choice of a candidate by a political party Decisions taken by the Gram Sabha Opinion polls conducted by the media Which of the following tasks are not performed by the Election Preparing the Electoral Rolls Nominating the candidates Setting up polling booths Implementing the model code of conduct Supervising the Panchayat elections Which of the following is common to the method of election of the members of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha? Every citizen above the age of 18 is an eligible voter Voter can give preference order for different candidates Every vote has equal value The winner must get more than half the votes In the First Past the Post system, that candidate is declared winner Secures the largest number of postal ballots Indian Constitution at Work Belongs to the party that has highest number of votes in the Has more votes than any other candidate in the constituency Attains first position by securing more than 50% votes What is the difference between the system of reservation of constituencies and the system of separate electorate? Why did the Constitution makers reject the latter? Which of the following statements are incorrect? Identify and correct them by substituting, adding or rearranging only one word or phrase. FPTP system is followed for all the elections in India. Election Commission does not supervise Panchayat and President of India cannot remove an Election Commissioner. Appointment of more than one Election Commissioner in the Election Commission is mandatory. Indian electoral system aims at ensuring representation of socially disadvantaged sections. However we have only 12 per cent women members in our legislatures. What measures would you suggest to improve the situation? Here are some wishes expressed in a conference to discuss a constitution for a new country.  Write against each of these whether FPTP or Proportional Representation system is more suited to meet each of these wishes. People should clearly know who is their representative so that they can hold him or her personally accountable. We have small linguistic minorities who are spread all over the country; we should ensure fair representation to them. There should be no discrepancy between votes and seats for People should be able to elect a good candidate even if they do not like his or her political party. A former Chief Election Commissioner joined a political party and contested elections. There are various views on this issue.  One view is that a former Election Commissioner  is an independent citizen and has a right to join any political party and to contest election. According to the other view, leaving this possibility open Chapter 3: Election and Representation can affect the impartiality of the Election Commission. So, former Election Commissioners must not be allowed to contest any elections. Which position do you agree with and why? 10.  Indian democracy is now ready to shift from a crude First Past the Post system to a system of Proportional Representation. Do you agree with this statement? Give your reasons for or against this For details about Systematic Voters  Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP) programme of the Election Commission of India and Electoral Literacy Club (ELC), Day (NVD) Pledge Day (NVD) Pledge Day (NVD) Pledge Day (NVD) Pledge Day (NVD) Pledge We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in democracy, hereby pledge to uphold the democratic traditions of our country and the dignity of free, fair and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election fearlessly and without being influenced by considerations of religion, race, caste, community, language or any inducement. Source: Election Commission of India, Indian Constitution at Work Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government.  Together, they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive. In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading this chapter, you will be able to   make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;   understand the constitutional position of the President of India;   know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the importance of the Prime Minister; and   understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery. Chapter 4: Executive WHAT IS AN EXECUTIVE? Who is in charge of the administration of your school? Who takes important decisions in a school or a university? In any organisation, some office holder has to take decisions and implement those decisions. We call this activity administration or management. But administration requires a body at the top that will take policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You may have heard about the executives of big companies, banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body of those who function as the chief administrators or the executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide the policies and rules and regulations and then some office holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day functioning of the organisation. The word executive means a body of persons that looks after the implementation of rules and regulations in actual practice. In the case of government also, one body may take policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations, while the other one would be in charge of implementing those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks after the function of implementation and administration is called the executive. What are the principal functions of the executive? Executive is the branch of government responsible for the implementation of laws and policies adopted by the legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of policy. The official designations of the executive vary from country to country. Some countries have presidents, while others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants). While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled with the overall responsibility of government policy, are together known as the political executive, those responsible for day to day administration are called the I remember somebody saying that the executive in a democracy is accountable to people. Is that also true of executives in big companies? Aren t they called CEOs? Who are they Indian Constitution at Work WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE? Every country may not have the same type of executive. You may have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England. But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but their roles are different from each other. Why is this so? Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list those who attended the meeting. Can you imagine why those people and not some others are attending To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France, both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi- presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the chancellor is the head of government. In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well as head of government. In this system the office of president is very powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America. Chapter 4: Executive Indian Constitution at Work Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party or to different political parties. The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers. Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in- Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker can report the matter to the Supreme Court. How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka. In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of government. Most parliamentary systems have a president or a monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc. Chapter 4: Executive When the Constitution of India was written, India already had some experience of running the parliamentary system under the Acts of 1919 and 1935. This experience had shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to ensure that the government would be sensitive to public expectations and would be responsible and accountable. The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was the presidential form of government. But the presidential executive puts much emphasis on the president as the chief executive and as source of all executive power is always the danger of personality cult in presidential executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted a government that would have a strong executive branch, but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the executive will be answerable to and controlled by the legislature or people s representatives.  So the Constitution adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the governments both at the national and State levels. According to this system, there is a President who is the  formal Head of the state of India and the Prime Minister Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Check your progress Neha: It is really very simple. A country having a president has a presidential executive and one with a prime minister has parliamentary How would you explain to Neha that this is not always the case? Haven t we had very strong Prime Ministers? Does it mean that even the parliamentary system is not fool proof against personality cult? That means people and the legislatures have to be constantly vigilant! Indian Constitution at Work and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers. The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground for impeachment is violation of the Constitution. Power and position of President Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice. Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice.., and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the scope of the President s powers, a specific mention was made in the Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of Ministers will be binding on the President. By another amendment made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered advice of the Council of Ministers. Chapter 4: Executive We have already seen that President is the formal head of the government. In this formal sense, the President has wide ranging executive, legislative, judicial and emergency powers. In a parliamentary system, these powers are in reality used by the President only on the advice of the Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the President has to follow the advice of the Council of  We did not give him any real power but we have made his position one of authority and dignity. The constitution wants to create neither a real figurehead, but a head that neither reigns nor governs; it wants to create a great Am I just a figurehead or am I asking real questions? Did the textbook writers give me power to ask questions I wish to ask or am I asking questions they have in their mind? CAD, Vol. VI, p. 734 Discretionary Powers of the President On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the President has no discretionary power under any circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment. Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed of all important matters and deliberations of the Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all the information that the President may call for. The President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses his views on matters confronting the country. Indian Constitution at Work Besides this, there are at least three situations where the President can exercise the powers using his or her own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted that the President can send back the advice given by the Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider the decision. In doing this, the President acts on his (or her) own discretion. When the President thinks that the advice has certain flaws or legal lacunae, or that it is not in the best interests of the country, the President can ask the Council to reconsider the decision. Although, the Council can still send back the same advice and the President would then be bound by that advice, such a request by the President to reconsider the decision, would naturally carry a lot of weight. So, this is one way in which the president can act in his own discretion. Secondly, the President also has veto power by which he can withhold or refuse to give assent to Bills (other than Money Bill) passed by the Parliament. Every bill passed by the Parliament goes to the President for his assent before it becomes a law. The President can send the bill back to the Parliament asking it to reconsider the We saw that there is no time limit on the President for giving his assent to a bill. Do you know that such a thing has already happened? In 1986, the Parliament passed a bill known as Indian Post office (amendment) bill. This bill was widely criticised by many for it sought to curtail the freedom of the press. The then President, Gyani Zail Singh, did not take any decision on this bill. After his term was over, the next President, Venkataraman sent the bill finally back to the Parliament for reconsideration. By that time, the government that brought the bill before the Parliament had changed and a new government was elected in 1989. This government belonged to a different coalition and did not bring the bill back before the Parliament. Thus, Zail Singh s decision to postpone giving assent to the bill effectively meant that the bill could never become a law! It is very well to talk of the President as He  or  She, but has a woman ever become the Chapter 4: Executive bill. This  veto  power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President has to give assent to that bill.  However, there is no mention in the Constitution about the time limit within which the President must send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective manner. This is sometimes referred to as  pocket veto. Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister. Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances, two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support of the majority or who can actually form and run the government. Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained President s role in choosing the Prime Minister After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive and there have been many instances when no party had clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do in such situations? No political party or coalition secured majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee,  to furnish documents in support of his claim from concerned political parties.  Not stopping at this the President also advised Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of being sworn in. Indian Constitution at Work a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and coalitions occupy power. For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place. Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term, who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the government of the country. The Vice President of India The Vice President is elected for five years. His election method is similar to that of the President, the only difference is that members of State legislatures are not part of the electoral college. The Vice President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex- officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over the office of the President when there is a vacancy by reasons of death, resignation, removal by impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts as the President only until a new President is elected. B. D. Jatti acted as President on the death of Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was Chapter 4: Executive PRIME MINISTER AND COUNCIL OF MINISTERS Check your progress Imagine that the Prime Minister wants to impose  President s rule  in one State because the State government has failed to effectively curb atrocities against the Dalits in that State. The President has a different position. He is saying that the provision regarding President s rule should be used only sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses are open to the President? Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on the order promulgating President s rule. b. Dismiss the Prime Minister. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State. d. Make a press statement about how the Prime Minister is wrong. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and try to dissuade him from taking this action, but if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order. READ A CARTOON There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister  leads  the Council Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 22 August 1954 Indian Constitution at Work No discussion of government or politics in India, would normally take place without mentioning one office: the Prime Minister of India. Can you imagine why this is so? We have already seen earlier in this chapter that the President exercises his powers only on the advice of the Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers is headed by the Prime Minister. Therefore, as head of the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister becomes the most important functionary of the government in our country. In the parliamentary form of executive, it is essential that the Prime Minister has the support of the majority in the Lok Sabha. This support by the majority also makes the Prime Minister very powerful. The moment this support of the majority is lost, the Prime Minister loses the office. For many years after independence, the Congress party had the majority in the Lok Sabha and its leader would become the Prime Minister. Since 1989, there have been many occasions when no party had majority in the Lok Sabha. Various political parties have  come together and formed a coalition that has majority in the House. In such situations, a leader who is acceptable to most partners of the coalition becomes the Prime Minister. Formally, a leader who has the support of the majority is appointed by the President as Prime Minister. The Prime Minister then decides who will be the ministers in the Council of Ministers.  The Prime Minister allocates ranks and portfolios to the ministers. Depending upon the seniority and political importance, the ministers are given the ranks of cabinet minister, minister of State or deputy minister. In the same manner, Chief Ministers of the States choose ministers from their own party or coalition. The Prime Minister and all the ministers have to be members of the Parliament. If someone becomes a minister or Prime Minister R K Laxman in The Times of India. READ A CARTOON Why do people want to be ministers? This cartoon seems to suggest that it is only for perks and status! Then why is there competition for some portfolios? Chapter 4: Executive without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the Parliament within six months. There were some members in the Constituent Assembly who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister:  Swiss system under which the legislature elects the executive for a certain period  is to my mind the best form of government for the provinces  The system of the single transferable vote is...the best system that can be adopted for the appointment of the executive because in that all interests will be represented and no party in the legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD,  Vol. IV, p. 631, 17 July 1947 Size of the Council of Ministers Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions as there was no restriction on the number of the members of the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States). In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the executive. But remember that the most important feature of parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the control and supervision of the legislature. The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence Indian Constitution at Work of the Lok Sabha is obliged to resign. The principle indicates that the ministry is an executive committee of the Parliament and it collectively governs on behalf of the Parliament. Collective responsibility is based on the principle of the solidarity of the cabinet. It implies that a vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue or agree to a policy for which there is collective In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place in the government.  The Council of Ministers cannot exist without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led Pt. Nehru to describe him as  the linchpin of Government. It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the government and decides on the policies of the government. Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from various sources: control over the Council of Ministers, leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of personalities during elections, projection as national leader during international summitry as well as foreign Is it that a person becomes Prime Minister because he/she is powerful or is it that you become powerful once you have become the Prime Minister? Chapter 4: Executive However, the power which the Prime Minister wields and actually puts into use depends upon the prevailing political conditions. The position of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers has been unassailable whenever a single political party has secured majority in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not been the case when governments have been led by coalitions of political parties.  Since 1989, we have witnessed many coalition governments in India. Many of these governments could not remain in power for the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were either removed or they resigned due to loss of support of the majority. These developments have affected the working of the parliamentary executive. In the first place, these developments have resulted in a growing discretionary role of the President in the selection of Prime Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature of Indian politics in this period has necessitated much more consultation between political partners, leading to erosion of prime ministerial authority. Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on various prerogatives of the Prime Minister like choosing the ministers and deciding their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even the policies and programmes of the government cannot be decided by the Prime Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a negotiator than as leader of the government. At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though with some variations. The most important variation is that there is a Governor of the State appointed by the President (on the advice of R K Laxman in The Times of India. READ A CARTOON This Chief Minster is not happy confidence motion! Can you imagine why this is so? Indian Constitution at Work the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too. Check your progress Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of Ministers. What will he/she do? Select those who are experts in the various b. Select only those who are from his/her party. Select those who are personally loyal and d. Select those who are supporters of the Take into account the political weight of the various aspirants and choose from among them. PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY Who implements the decisions of the ministers? The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the difference between this machinery and the military service, it is described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are in charge of government and the administration is under their control and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the administration. India has established professional administrative Chapter 4: Executive machinery. At the same time, this machinery is made politically accountable. The bureaucracy is also expected to be politically neutral. This means that the bureaucracy will not take any political position on policy matters. In a democracy, it is always possible that a party is defeated in elections and the new government wants to opt for new policies in the place of policies of the previous government. In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently participate in  drafting the policy and in its The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State services, employees of the local governments, and technical and managerial staff running public sector undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of the importance of the non-partisan and professional bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of India. Similar public service commissions are provided for the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment, the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the Constitution has provided reservation in jobs for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Subsequently, reservations have also been provided for women, Other Backward Classes (OBC) and Economically Weaker Sections (EWS). These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be more representative and social inequalities will not come in the way of recruitment to the civil service. Yes, I know that the officers are there to serve the people. But people are always afraid of these officers. And officers also behave as if they were the Indian Constitution at Work Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district is the most important officer of the government at the district level. Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the central government, they can go back into the service of the central government and most importantly, only the central government can take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism, this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central government over the administration of the States. The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer. It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen. Only if the democratically elected government controls the bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment, many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil Chapter 4: Executive servants from political interference in the performance of their duties. It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable. The modern executive is a very powerful institution of government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to other organs of the government. This generates a greater need to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections, constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become 1. A parliamentary executive means: Executive where there is a parliament b. Executive elected by the parliament Where the parliament functions as the Executive d. Executive that is dependent on support of the majority in the 2. Read this dialogue. Which argument do you agree with? Why? Amit: Looking at the constitutional provisions, it seems that the President is only a rubber stamp. Shama: The President appoints the Prime Minister. So, he must have the powers to remove the Prime Minister as well. Rajesh: We don t need a President. After the election, the Parliament can meet and elect a leader to be the Prime Minister. Indian Constitution at Work 3. Match the following i. Works within the particular State in ii. Works in any central government b. State Civil office located either at the national capital or elsewhere in the country iii. Works in a particular State to which All India Services allotted; can also be sent on deputation to the centre iv. Works in Indian missions abroad d. Central Services 4. Identify the ministry which may have released the following news items. Would this be a ministry of the central government or the State government? Why? An official release said that in 2004-05 the Tamil Nadu Textbooks Corporation would release new versions for standards VII, X and XI. b. A new railway loop line bypassing the crowded Tiruvallur- Chennai section to help iron ore exporters. The new line, likely to be about 80 km long, will branch off at Puttur and then reach Athipattu near the port. The three-member sub-divisional committee formed to verify suicide by farmers in Ramayampet mandal has found that the two farmers who committed suicide this month have had economic problems due to failure of crops. 5.  While appointing the Prime Minister, the President selects Leader of the largest party in the Lok Sabha b. Leader of the largest party in the alliance which secures a majority in the Lok Sabha The leader of the largest party in the Rajya Sabha d. Leader of the alliance or party that has the support of the majority in Lok Sabha Chapter 4: Executive 6. Read this discussion and say which of these statements applies most to India. Alok: Prime Minister is like a king, he decides everything in our Shekhar: Prime Minister is only  first among equals, he does not have any special powers. All ministers and the PM have similar Bobby: Prime Minister has to consider the expectations of the party members and other supporters of the government. But after all, the Prime Minister has a greater say in policy making and in choosing the ministers. 7.  Why do you think is the advice of the Council of Ministers binding on the President?  Give your answer in not more than 100 words. 8. The parliamentary system of executive vests many powers in the legislature for controlling the executive. Why, do you think, is it so necessary to control the executive? 9. It is said that there is too much political interference in the working of the administrative machinery. It is suggested that there should be more and more autonomous agencies which do not have to answer to the ministers. Do you think this will make administration more people- b. Do you think this will make administration more efficient? Does democracy mean full control of elected representatives over the administration? 10.  Write an essay of two hundred words on the proposal to have an elected administration instead of an appointed administration. Indian Constitution at Work You have already studied the importance of elections and the method of election adopted in India. Legislatures are elected by the people and work on behalf of the people. In this chapter you would study how elected legislatures function and help in maintaining democratic government. You will also learn about the composition and functioning of the parliament and State legislatures in India and their importance in democratic government. After reading this chapter you the importance of the legislature; the functions and powers of the Parliament of India; the law making procedure; how the Parliament controls the executive; and how the Parliament regulates itself. Chapter 5: Legislature WHY DO WE NEED A PARLIAMENT? Legislature is not merely a law making body. Lawmaking is but one of the functions of the legislature. It is the centre of all democratic political process. It is packed with action; walkouts, protests, demonstration, unanimity, concern and co-operation.  All these serve very vital purposes. Indeed, a genuine democracy is inconceivable without a representative, efficient and effective legislature. The legislature also helps people in holding the representatives accountable. This is indeed, the very basis of representative Yet, in most democracies, legislatures are losing central place to the executive. In India too, the Cabinet initiates policies, sets the agenda for governance and carries them through. This has led some critics to remark that the Parliament has declined. But even very strong cabinets must retain majority in the legislature. A strong leader has to face the Parliament and answer to the satisfaction of the Parliament. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Parliament. It is recognised as one of the most democratic and open forum of debate. On account of its composition, it is the most representative of all organs of government. It is above all, vested with the power to choose and dismiss the government. Consider these newspaper reports and then think: what would happen if there were no legislatures? After reading each news report, state how the legislature succeeded or failed in  maintaining control over the executive. 28th February 2002: The Union Finance Minister, Jaswant Singh, announced in the Union budget proposal an increase of  Rs. 12 in the price of a 50 kg bag of urea and a smaller increase in the price of two other fertilizers which constituted about 5 per cent rise in prices. The current urea price of Rs. 4,830 a tonne carries a subsidy of as much as 80 per cent. Indian Constitution at Work WHY DO WE NEED TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT? The term  Parliament  refers to the national legislature. The legislature of the States is described as State legislature. The Parliament in India has two houses. When there are two houses of the legislature, it is called a bicameral legislature. The two Houses of the Indian Parliament are the Council of States or the Rajya Sabha and the House of the People or the Lok Sabha. The Constitution has given the States the option of establishing either a unicameral or bicameral legislature. At present only six States have a bicameral legislature. 11 March 2002. The Finance Minister had to roll back the increases in fertilizer prices under intense opposition pressure (The Hindu, 12 March 2002) On 4 June 1998, the Lok Sabha witnessed acrimonious scenes over the hike in urea and petroleum process. The entire opposition staged a walkout. The issue rocked the house for two days leading to walkout by opposition. The finance minister in his budget proposal had proposed a hike of 50 paisa per kilogram of urea to reduce subsidy on it. This forced the finance minister Mr. Yashwant Sinha to roll back the hike in urea prices ( Hindustan Times, 4 and 5 June 1998) 22 February 1983: In a rare move, the Lok Sabha today unanimously decided to suspend official business and give precedence to debate on Assam. Home Minister P.C.Sethi made a statement  I seek the cooperation of all members whatever their views and policies, in promoting harmony among different communities and groups living in Assam. What is needed now is not acrimony but  a healing touch.  (Hindustan Times, 22 February 1983) Congress Members voiced protest against atrocities on Harijans in Andhra Pradesh (The Hindu, 3 March 1985) Chapter 5: Legislature States having a bicameral legislature are given below: Indian Constitution at Work Countries with large size and much diversity usually prefer to have two houses of the national legislature to give representation to all sections in the society and to give representation to all geographical regions or parts of the country. A bicameral legislature has one more advantage. A bicameral legislature makes it possible to have every decision reconsidered. Every decision taken by one house goes to the other house for its decision. This means that every bill and policy would be discussed twice. This ensures a double check on every matter. Even if one house takes a decision in haste, that decision will come for discussion in the other house and reconsideration will be Each of the two Houses of Parliament has different bases of representation. The Rajya Sabha represents the States of India. It is an indirectly elected body. Residents of the State elect members to State Legislative Assembly. The elected members of State Legislative Assembly in turn elect the members of the Rajya Sabha. We can imagine two different principles of representation in the second chamber. One way is to give equal representation to all the parts of the country irrespective of their size or population. We may call this as symmetrical representation. On the other hand, parts of the country may be given representation according to their...an Upper House could perform the...useful function of being a revising body, and...its views may count but not its votes......,those who could not enter into the rough and tumble of active politics could...advise the Lower House.  CAD, Vol. IX, p. 33, 30 July 1949 Chapter 5: Legislature population. This second method means that regions or parts having larger representatives in the second chamber than regions having less population. In the USA, every state has equal representation in the Senate. This ensures equality of all the states. But this also means that a small state would have the same representation as the larger states. The system of representation adopted for the Rajya Sabha is different from that in the USA. The number of members to be elected from each State has been fixed by the fourth schedule of the Constitution. What would happen if we were to follow the American system of equality of representation in the Rajya Sabha? Uttar Pradesh with a population of 1998.12 lakhs would get seats equal to that of Sikkim whose population is only 6.10 lakhs. The framers of the Constitution wanted to prevent such discrepancy. States with larger population get more representatives than States with smaller population get. Thus, a more populous State like Uttar Pradesh sends 31 members to the Rajya Sabha, while a smaller and less populous State like Sikkim has one seat in the Rajya Sabha. Members of the Rajya Sabha are elected for a term of six years. They can get re-elected. All members of the Rajya Sabha do not complete their terms at the same time. Every two years, one third members of the Rajya Sabha Bicameralism in Germany Germany has a bicameral legislature. The two Houses Assembly (Bundestag) and Federal Council (Bundesrat). Assembly is elected by a complex system combining representation for a period of The 16 federal states of Germany are represented in the Federal Council. The 69 seats of the Bundesrat are divided among states on the basis of a range of populations. These members are generally governments at the state level and are appointed, not elected, by the governments of the federal states. According to the German law, all the members from one state have to vote as a bloc as per the instructions of the state governments. Sometimes due to coalition government at the state level, they fail to reach an agreement and may have to abstain. The Bundesrat does not vote on all legislative initiatives but all the policy areas on which the federal states have concurrent powers and are regulations must be passed by it. It can also veto such Indian Constitution at Work complete their term and elections are held for those one third seats only. Thus, the Rajya Sabha is never fully dissolved. Therefore, it is called the permanent House of the Parliament. The advantage of this arrangement is that even when the Lok Sabha is dissolved and elections are yet to take place, the meeting of the Rajya Sabha can be called and urgent business can be conducted. Apart from the elected members, Rajya Sabha also has twelve nominated members. The President nominates these members. These nominations are made from among those persons who have made their mark in the fields of literature, science, art and social service. Find out the number of representatives elected from different States. Prepare a chart showing number of representatives and the population of the State according to the 2011 census. The Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies are directly elected by the people. For the purpose of election, the entire country (State, in case of State Legislative Assembly) is divided into territorial constituencies of roughly equal population. One representative is elected from each constituency through universal adult suffrage where the value of vote of every individual would be equal to another. At present there are 543 constituencies. This number has not changed since 1971 census. The Lok Sabha is elected for a period of five years. This is the maximum. We have seen in the chapter on the executive that before the completion of five years, the Lok Sabha can be dissolved if no party or coalition can form the government or if the Prime Minister advises the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha and hold fresh I don t understand why there is a provision for nominating these sportspersons and artists and scientists. Whom do they represent? And, do they really contribute much to the proceedings of the Rajya Sabha? Chapter 5: Legislature WHAT DOES THE PARLIAMENT DO? What is the function of the legislature? Do both Houses of the Parliament have similar functions? Is there a difference in the powers of the two Houses? Apart from law making, the Parliament is engaged in many other functions. Let us list the functions of the Parliament: Legislative Function: The Parliament enacts legislations for the country. Despite being the chief law making body, the Parliament often merely approves legislations. The actual task of drafting the bill is performed by the bureaucracy under the supervision of the minister concerned.  The substance and even the timing of the bill are decided by the Cabinet. No major bill is introduced in the Parliament without the approval of the Cabinet. Members other than ministers can also introduce bills but these have no chance of being passed without the support of the government. Control of Executive and ensuring its accountability: Perhaps the most vital function of the Parliament is to ensure that the executive does not overstep its authority and remains responsible to the people who have elected them. We shall discuss this function in greater detail later in this chapter. Financial Function: Government is about spending a lot of money on various matters. Where does this money come from? Every Check your progress Do you think that composition of Rajya Sabha has protected the position of States of India? Should indirect election of Rajya Sabha be replaced by direct elections? What would be its advantages and disadvantages? Since 1971 census the number of seats in the Lok Sabha has not increased. Do you think that it should be increased? What should be the basis for this? Indian Constitution at Work government raises resources through taxation. However, in a democracy, legislature controls taxation and the way in which money is used by the government. If the Government of India proposes to introduce any new tax, it has to get the approval of the Lok Sabha. The financial powers of the Parliament involve grant of resources to the government to implement its programmes. The government has to give an account to the legislature about the money it has spent and resources that it wishes to raise. The legislature also ensures that the government does not misspend or overspend. This is done through the budget and annual financial statements. Representation: Parliament represents the divergent views of members from different regional, social, economic, religious groups of different parts of the country. Debating Function: The Parliament is the highest forum of debate in the country. There is no limitation on its power of discussion. Members are free to speak on any matter without fear. This makes it possible for the Parliament to analyse any or every issue that faces the nation.  These discussions constitute the heart of democratic decision making. The Parliament is the boss and the ministers are looking very humble here. That is the effect of the Parliament s power to sanction money to different ministries. Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 3 April 1955 READ A CARTOON Chapter 5: Legislature Constituent Function: The Parliament has the power of discussing and enacting changes to the Constitution. The constituent powers of both the houses are similar. All constitutional amendments have to be approved by a special majority of both Houses. Electoral functions: The Parliament also performs some electoral functions. It elects the President and Vice President of India. Judicial functions: The judicial functions of the Parliament include considering the proposals for removal of President, Vice-President and Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court. Powers of Rajya Sabha We discussed above, the functions that are performed by the Parliament in general. However, in a bicameral legislature, there is some difference between the powers of the two Houses. Look at the charts showing the powers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Powers of Rajya Sabha Considers and  approves non money bills and suggests amendments to Exercises control over executive by asking motions and resolutions. Participates in the election and removal of the President, Vice President, Judges of Supreme Court and High Court.It can alone initiate the procedure for removal of Can give the Union parliament power to make laws on matters included in the State list. Powers  of the  Lok Sabha Makes Laws on matters included in Union List and Concurrent List. Can introduce and enact money and non money bills. Approves proposals for taxation, budgets and annual financial statements. Controls the executive by resolutions and motions and through no confidence motion. Amends the Constitution. Approves the Proclamation of Elects the President and Vice President  and removes Judges of Supreme Court and Establishes committees and commissions and considers Indian Constitution at Work Special Powers of Rajya Sabha As you know, the Rajya Sabha is an institutional mechanism to provide representation to the States. Its purpose is to protect the powers of the States. Therefore, any matter that affects the States must be referred to it for its consent and approval. Thus, if the Union Parliament wishes to remove a matter from the State list (over which only the State Legislature can make law) to either the Union List or Concurrent List in the interest of the nation, the approval of the Rajya Sabha is necessary. This provision adds to the strength of the Rajya Sabha. However, experience shows that the members of the Rajya Sabha represent their parties more than they represent their Powers exercised only by the Lok Sabha:  Then, there are powers that only the Lok Sabha exercises. The Rajya Sabha cannot initiate, reject or amend money bills. The Council of Ministers is responsible to the Lok Sabha and not Rajya Sabha. Therefore, Rajya Sabha can criticise the government but cannot remove it. Can you explain why? The Rajya Sabha is elected by the MLAs and not directly by the people. Therefore, the Constitution stopped short of giving certain powers to the Rajya Sabha. In a democratic form as adopted by our Constitution, the people are the final authority. By this logic, the representatives, directly elected by the people, should have the crucial powers of removing a government and controlling the finances. In all other spheres, including passing of non-money bills, constitutional amendments, and impeaching the President and removing the Vice President the powers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha are co-equal. HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT MAKE LAWS? The basic function of any legislature is to make laws for its people. A definite procedure is followed in the process of making law. Some of the procedures of law making are So, the Lok Sabha controls the purse! Then it must be the more Chapter 5: Legislature mentioned in the Constitution, while some have evolved from conventions. Follow a bill through the legislative process  and you will clearly see that the law making process is technical and Bill Sent to the House itself. or may not of bill in Bill is accepted Sent to the approves or gives Joint Session of Indian Constitution at Work A bill is a draft of the proposed law. There can be different types of bills. When a non-minister proposes a bill, it is called private member s Bill. A bill proposed by a minister is described as Government Bill.  Let us now see the different stages in the life of a bill. Even before a bill is introduced in the Parliament there may be a lot of debate on the need for introducing such a bill. A political party may pressurise the government to initiate a bill in order to fulfil its election promises or to improve its chances of winning forthcoming elections. Interest groups, media and citizens  forums may also persuade the government for a particular legislation. Law making is thus not merely a legal procedure but also a political course of action. The preparation of a bill itself involves many considerations such as resources required to implement the law, the support or opposition that the bill is likely to produce, the impact that the law may have on Types of Bills Chapter 5: Legislature the electoral prospect of the ruling party etc. In the era of coalition politics especially, a bill proposed by the government has to be acceptable to all the partners of the coalition. Such practical considerations can hardly be ignored. The Cabinet considers all these before arriving at a decision to enact a law. Once the Cabinet approves the policy behind the legislation, the task of drafting the legislation begins. The draft of any bill is prepared by the concerned ministry. For instance a bill raising the marriageable age of girls from 18 to 21 will be prepared by the law ministry. The ministry of women and child welfare may also be involved in it. Within the Parliament, a bill may be introduced in the Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha by a member of the House (but often a minister responsible for the subject introduces the bill). A money bill can be introduced only in Lok Sabha. Once passed there, it is sent to the A large part of the discussion on the bills takes place in the committees. The recommendation of the committee is then sent to the House. That is why committees are referred to as miniature legislatures. This is the second stage in the law making process. In the third and final stage, the bill is voted upon. If a non-money bill is passed by one House, it is sent to the other House where it goes through exactly the same procedure. As you know, a bill has to be passed by both Houses for enactment. If there is disagreement between the two Houses on the proposed bill, attempt is made to resolve it through Joint Session of Parliament. In the few instances when joint sessions of the parliament were called to resolve a deadlock, the decision has always gone in favour of the Lok Sabha. If it is a money bill, the Rajya Sabha can either approve the bill or suggest changes but cannot reject it. If it takes no action within 14 days the bill is deemed to have been passed. Amendments to the bill, suggested by Rajya Sabha, may or may not be accepted by the Lok Sabha. READ A CARTOON Is this how they follow the  rules of the game ? R K Laxman in The Times of India. Indian Constitution at Work When a bill is passed by both Houses, it is sent to the President for his assent. The assent of the President results in the enactment of a bill into a law. Special procedure in respect of A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of Check  your progress From the discussion of the law making process, do you think that Parliament can devote enough time for thorough discussion of the bills? If not, then what remedies would you suggest to overcome HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT CONTROL THE EXECUTIVE? In a parliamentary democracy, the executive is drawn from the party or a coalition of parties that has a majority in Lok Sabha. It is not difficult for the executive to exercise unlimited and arbitrary powers with the support of the majority party. In such a situation, parliamentary democracy may slip into Cabinet dictatorship, where the Cabinet leads and the House merely follows.  Only if the Parliament is active and vigilant, can it keep regular and effective check on the executive. There are many ways in which the Parliament can control the executive. But basic to them all is the power and freedom of the legislators as people s representatives to work effectively and fearlessly. For instance, no action can be taken against a member for Chapter 5: Legislature whatever the member may have said in the legislature. This is known as parliamentary privilege. The presiding officer of the legislature has the final powers in deciding matters of breach of privilege. The main purpose of such privileges is to enable the members of the legislature to represent the people and exercise effective control over the executive. How does the Parliament exercise such control? What are the means available at its disposal? Is parliamentary control successful in curbing executive excesses? Instruments of Parliamentary Control The legislature in parliamentary system ensures executive accountability at various stages: policy making, implementation of law or policy and during and post- implementation stage. The legislature does this through the use of a variety of devices: Deliberation and discussion Approval or Refusal of laws No confidence motion Deliberation and discussion: During the law making process, members of the legislature get an opportunity to deliberate on the policy direction of the executive and the ways in which policies are implemented. Apart from deliberating on bills, control may also be exercised during the general discussions in the House. The Question Hour, which is held every day during the sessions of Parliament, where Ministers have to respond to searching questions raised by the members; Zero Hour where members are free to raise any matter that they think is important (though the ministers are not bound to reply), half-an-hour discussion on matters of public importance, adjournment motion, etc., are some instruments of Perhaps the question hour is the most effective method of keeping vigil on the executive and the administrative agencies of the government. Members of Parliament have With so many sting operations are MPs still free to speak Indian Constitution at Work shown great interest in question hour and maximum attendance is recorded during this time. Most of the questions aim at eliciting information from the government on issues of public interest such as, price rise, availability of food grains, atrocities on weaker sections of the society, riots, black-marketing, etc. This gives the members an opportunity to criticise the government, and represent the problems of their constituencies. The discussions during the question hour are so heated that it is not uncommon to see members raise their voice, walk to the well of the house or walk out in protest to make their point. This results in considerable loss of legislative time. At the same time, we must remember that many of these actions are political techniques to gain concessions from government and in the process force executive accountability. Approval and ratification of laws: Parliamentary control is also exercised through its power of ratification. A bill can become a law only with the approval of the Parliament. A government that has the support of a disciplined majority may not find it difficult to get the approval of the Legislature. Such approvals however, cannot be taken for granted. They are the products of intense bargaining and negotiations amongst the members of ruling party or coalition of parties and even government and opposition. If the government has majority in Lok Sabha but not in the Rajya Sabha, as has happened during the Janata Party rule in 1977 and N.D.A. rule in 2000, the government will be forced to make substantial concessions to gain the approval of both the Houses. Many bills, such as the Lok Pal Bill have failed enactment, Prevention of Terrorism bill (2002) was rejected by the Rajya Sabha. Financial control: As mentioned earlier, financial resources to implement the programmes of the government are granted through the budget. Preparation and presentation of budget for the approval of the legislature is constitutional obligation of the government. This obligation allows the legislature to exercise control It must be difficult to be a minister. This is like giving an examination almost every day! Chapter 5: Legislature over the purse strings of the government. The legislature may refuse to grant resources to the government. This seldom happens because the government ordinarily enjoys support of the majority in the parliamentary system. Nevertheless, before granting money the Lok Sabha can discuss the reasons for which the government requires money. It can enquire into cases of misuse of funds on the basis of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public Accounts committees. But the legislative control is not only aimed at financial propriety. The legislature is concerned about the policies of the government that are reflected in the budget. Through financial control, the legislature controls the policy of the government. No Confidence Motion: The most powerful weapon that enables the Parliament to ensure executive accountability is the no-confidence motion. As long as the government has the support of its party or coalition of parties that have a majority in the Lok Sabha, the power of the House to dismiss the government is fictional rather than real. However, after 1989, several governments have been forced to resign due to lack of confidence of the house. Each of these governments lost the confidence of the Lok Sabha because they failed to retain the support of their coalition partners. Thus, the Parliament can effectively control the executive and ensure a more responsive government. It is however important for this purpose, that there is adequate time at the disposal of the House, the members are interested in discussion and participate effectively and there is willingness to compromise amongst the government and the opposition. In the last two decades, there has been a gradual decline in sessions of the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies and time spent on debates. Moreover, the Houses of the Parliament have been plagued by absence of quorum, boycott of sessions by members of opposition which deprive the house the power to control the executive through discussion. Watch the Dooradarshan telecast of Parliament sessions for three continuous days. Or collect the newspaper reports for three continuous days and make a wallpaper. Take care to observe the issues Indian Constitution at Work WHAT DO THE COMMITTEES OF A significant feature of the legislative process is the appointment of committees for various legislative purposes. These committees play a vital role not merely in law making, but also in the day-to-day business of the House. Since the Parliament meets only during sessions, it has very limited time at its disposal. The making of law for instance requires in-depth study of the issue under consideration. This in turn demands more attention and time. Similarly, there are other important functions also, like studying the demands for grants made by various ministries, looking into expenditure incurred by various departments, investigating cases of corruption etc. Parliamentary committees perform such functions. Since 1983, India has developed a system of parliamentary standing committees. There are over twenty such departmentally related committees. Standing Committees supervise the work of various departments, their budget, their expenditure and bills that come up in the house relating to Apart from standing committees, the Joint Parliamentary Committees have occupied a position of eminence in our country. Joint Parliamentary Committees (JPCs) can be set up for the purpose of discussing a particular bill, like the joint committee to discuss being discussed, the role of the speaker, questions being asked, the political parties of the representatives, representatives from your region, nature of the issues of discussion   whether they were all of national or regional in character. READ A CARTOON Walkout is a frequently adopted measure by the opposition to register their government. Has there been an overuse of that weapon? Chapter 5: Legislature bill, or for the purpose of investigating financial irregularities. Members of these committees are selected from both Houses. The committee system has reduced the burden on the Parliament. Many important bills have been referred to committees. The Parliament has merely approved the work done in the committees with few occasional alterations. Of course legally speaking, no bill can become law, and no budget will be sanctioned unless approved by the Parliament. But the Parliament rarely rejects the suggestions made by the committees. HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT REGULATE ITSELF? Parliament as mentioned earlier is a debating forum. It is through debates that the parliament performs all its vital functions. Such discussions must be meaningful and orderly so that the functions of the Parliament are carried out smoothly and its dignity is intact. The Constitution itself has made certain provisions to ensure smooth conduct of business. The presiding officer of the legislature is the final authority in matters of regulating the business of the legislature. So, the lawmakers too, are subject to some laws!  The nature of the legislature is such that there are restrictions only so far as procedure is concerned. But in substance there is no restriction, no limitation on the sovereignty of the N.V. Gadgil, CAD, Vol. XI, p.659, 18 November 1949 Indian Constitution at Work There is one more way in which the presiding officers control the behaviour of the members. You may have heard about the anti-defection law. Most of the members of the legislatures are elected on the ticket of some political party. What would happen if they decide to leave the party after getting elected? For many years after independence, this issue was unresolved. Finally there was an agreement among the parties that a legislator who is elected on one party s ticket must be restricted from  defecting  to another party. An amendment to the Constitution was made (52nd amendment act) in 1985. This is known as anti-defection amendment. It has also been subsequently modified by the 91st amendment. The presiding officer of the House is the authority who takes final decisions on all such cases. If it is proved that a member has  defected, then such I don t understand why they change parties. Do they even come back to the party they once READ A CARTOON  We are not walking out, we have been ordered out,  said the MPs. Why do you think such situations occur? Chapter 5: Legislature member loses the membership of the House. Besides, such a person is also disqualified from holding any political office like What is defection? If a member remains absent in the House when asked by the party leadership to remain present or votes against the instructions of the party or voluntarily leaves the membership of the party, it is deemed as defection. Experience of the past twenty years shows that the anti-defection amendment has not been able to curb defections, but it has given additional powers to the party leadership and the presiding officers of the legislatures over the members. Have you watched the live telecast of the proceeding of the Parliament? You will find that our Parliament is truly a rainbow of colourful dresses symbolising different regions of the country. Members speak different languages in the course of the proceedings. They come from various castes, religions and sects. They often fight bitterly. Many times an impression is created that they are wasting the time and money of the nation.  But we have seen in this chapter that these same parliamentarians can effectively control the executive. They can express the interests of various sections of our society. On account of its composition, Legislature is the most representative of all organs of government. The sheer presence of members of diverse social backgrounds makes the legislatures more representative and potentially more responsive to people s expectations.  In a parliamentary democracy, legislature, as a body representing the wishes of the people occupies a high position of power and responsibility. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Indian Constitution at Work Alok thinks that a country needs an efficient government that looks after the welfare of the people. So, if we simply elected our Prime Minister and Ministers and left to them the task of government, we will not need a legislature. Do you agree? Give reasons for your A class was debating the merits of a bicameral system. The following points were made during the discussion. Read the arguments and say if you agree or disagree with each of them, giving reasons. Neha said that bicameral legislature does not serve any purpose. Shama argued that experts should be nominated in the second Tridib said that if a country is not a federation, then there is no need to have a second chamber. Why can the Lok Sabha control the executive more effectively than the Rajya Sabha can? Rather than effective control of the executive, the Lok Sabha is a platform for the expression of popular sentiments and people s expectations. Do you agree? Give reasons. The following are some proposals for making the Parliament more effective. State if you agree or disagree with each of them and give your reasons. Explain what would be the effect if these suggestions Parliament should work for longer period. Attendance should be made compulsory for members of Speakers should be empowered to penalise members for interrupting the proceedings of the House. Arif wanted to know that if ministers propose most of the important bills and if the majority party often gets the government bills passed, what is the role of the Parliament in the law making process?  What answer would you give him? Chapter 5: Legislature 7. Which of the following statements you agree with the most? Give Legislators must be free to join any party they want. Anti-defection law has contributed to the domination of the party leaders over the legislators. Defection is always for selfish purposes and therefore, a legislator who wants to join another party must be disqualified from being a minister for the next two years. 8. Dolly and Sudha are debating about the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliament in recent times. Dolly believed that the decline of Indian Parliament is evident in the less time spent on debate and discussion and increase in the disturbances of the functioning of the House and walkouts etc. Sudha contends that the fall of different governments on the floor of Lok Sabha is a proof of its vibrancy. What other arguments can you provide to support or oppose the positions of Dolly and Sudha? 9. Arrange the different stages of passing of a bill into a law in their A resolution is passed to admit the bill for discussion The bill is referred to the President of India   write what happens next if s/he does not sign it The bill is referred to other House and is passed The bill is passed in the house in which it was proposed The bill is read clause by clause and each is voted upon The bill is referred to the subcommittee   the committee makes some changes and sends it back to the house for discussion The concerned minister proposes the need for a bill Legislative department in ministry of law, drafts a bill 10. How has the system of parliamentary committee affected the overseeing and appraisal of legislation by the Parliament? Indian Constitution at Work Many times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individuals or private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciary is an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact, one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. In this chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In the chapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is very important for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would be able to understand   the meaning of independence of judiciary;   the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;   the role of the Judiciary in interpreting the Constitution; and   the relationship between the Judiciary and the Parliament of India. Chapter 6: Judiciary WHY DO WE NEED AN INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY? In any society, disputes are bound to arise between individuals, between groups and between individuals or groups and government. All such disputes must be settled by an independent body in accordance with the principle of rule of law. This idea of rule of law implies that all individuals   rich and poor, men or women, forward or backward castes   are subjected to the same law. The principal role of the judiciary is to protect rule of law and ensure supremacy of law. It safeguards rights of the individual, settles disputes in accordance with the law and ensures that democracy does not give dictatorship. In order to be able to do all this, it is necessary that the judiciary is independent of any What is meant by an independent judiciary? How is this independence Independence of Judiciary Simply stated independence of judiciary means that the other organs of the government like the executive and legislature must not restrain the functioning of the judiciary in such a way that it is unable to do justice. the other organs of the government should not interfere with the decision of the judiciary. judges must be able to perform their functions without fear or Independence of the judiciary does not imply arbitrariness or absence of accountability.  Judiciary is a part of the democratic political structure of the No fisticuffs please, this is rule of law! READ  A CARTOON R K Laxman in The Times of India. Indian Constitution at Work country. It is therefore accountable to the Constitution, to the democratic traditions and to the people of the How can the independence of judiciary be provided The Indian Constitution has ensured the independence of the judiciary through a number of measures. The legislature is not involved in the process of appointment of judges. Thus, it was believed that party politics would not play a role in the process of appointments. In order to be appointed as a judge, a person must have experience as a lawyer and/or must be well versed in law. Political opinions of the person or his/ her political loyalty should not be the criteria for appointments to judiciary. The judges have a fixed tenure. They hold office till reaching the age of retirement. Only in exceptional cases, judges may be removed. But otherwise, they have security of tenure. Security of tenure ensures that judges could function without fear or favour. The Constitution prescribes a very difficult procedure for removal of judges. The Constitution makers believed that a difficult procedure of removal would provide security of office to the members of judiciary. The judiciary is not financially dependent on either the executive or legislature. The Constitution provides that the salaries and allowances of the judges are not subjected to the approval of the legislature. The actions and decisions of the judges are immune from personal criticisms. The judiciary has the power to penalise those who are found guilty of contempt of court. This authority of the court is seen as an effective protection to the judges from unfair criticism. Parliament cannot discuss the conduct of the judges except when the proceeding  to remove a judge is being carried out. This gives the judiciary independence to adjudicate without fear of being I remember the case of Machal mentioned in chapter two. Don t they say,  justice delayed is justice denied ? Somebody should do something about Chapter 6: Judiciary Hold a debate in class on the following Which of the following factors do you think, work as constraints over the judges in giving their rulings? Do you think these are Opinion of other courts Traditions of law Time and staff constraints Fear of public criticism Fear of action by executive Appointment of Judges The appointment of judges has never been free from political controversy. It is part of the political process. It makes a difference who serves in the Supreme Court and High Court  a difference in how the Constitution is interpreted. The political philosophy of the judges, their views about active and assertive judiciary or controlled and committed judiciary have an impact on the fate of the legislations enacted. Council of Ministers, Governors and Chief Ministers and Chief Justice of India   all influence the process of judicial appointment. As far as the appointment of the Chief Justice of India (CJI) is concerned, over the years, a convention had developed whereby the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court was appointed as the Chief Justice of India. This convention was however broken twice. In 1973 A. N. Ray was appointed as CJI superseding three senior Judges. Again, Justice M.H. Beg was appointed superseding Justice H.R. Khanna (1975). I am afraid, I am getting confused. In a democracy, you can criticise the Prime Minister or even the President, but not the judges! And what is this contempt of court? But am I being guilty of contempt if I asked about these matters? Indian Constitution at Work The other Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court are appointed by the President after  consulting  the CJI. This, in effect, meant that the final decisions in matters of appointment rested with the Council of Ministers. What then, was the status of the consultation with the Chief Justice? This matter came up before the Supreme Court again and again between 1982 and 1998. Initially, the court felt that role of the Chief Justice was purely consultative. Then it took the view that the opinion of the Chief Justice must be followed by the President. Finally, the Supreme Court has come up with a novel procedure: it has suggested that the Chief Justice should recommend names of persons to be appointed in consultation with four senior-most judges of the Court. Thus, the Supreme Court has established the principle of collegiality in making recommendations for appointments. At the moment therefore, in matters of appointment the decision of the group of senior judges of the Supreme Court carries greater weight. Thus, in matters of appointment to the judiciary, the Supreme Court and the Council of Ministers play an important role. Removal of Judges The removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the Supreme Court or High Court can be removed only on the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion containing the charges against the judge must be approved by special majority in both Houses of the Parliament. Do you remember what special majority means? We have studied this in the chapter on Elections. It is clear from this procedure that removal of a judge is a very difficult procedure and unless there is a general consensus among Members of the Parliament, a judge cannot be removed. It should also be noted that while in making appointments, the executive plays a crucial role; the legislature has the powers of removal. This has ensured But I think, finally the Council of Ministers would have greater say in appointing judges. Or is it that the judiciary is a self- Chapter 6: Judiciary both balance of power and independence of the judiciary. So far, only one case of removal of a judge of the Supreme Court came up for consideration before Parliament. In that case, though the motion got two-thirds majority, it did not have the support of the majority of the total strength of the House and therefore, the judge was not Unsuccessful Attempt to Remove a Judge In 1991 the first-ever motion to remove a Supreme Court Justice was signed by 108 members of Parliament. Justice V. Ramaswami, during his tenure as the Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana High Court was accused of misappropriating funds. In 1992, a year after Parliament had started the removal proceedings, a high-profile inquiry commission consisting of Judges of the Supreme Court found Justice V. Ramaswami  guilty of wilful and gross misuses of office... and moral turpitude by using public funds for private purposes and reckless disregard of statutory rules  while serving as the Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana High Court. Despite this strong indictment, Ramaswami survived the parliamentary recommending his removal got the required two-thirds majority among the members who were present and voting, but the Congress party abstained from voting in the House. Therefore, the motion could not get the support of one-half of the total strength of the House. Check your progress Why is independence of the judiciary Do you think that executive should have the power to appoint judges? If you were asked to make suggestions for changing the procedure of appointing judges, what changes would you Indian Constitution at Work STRUCTURE OF THE JUDICIARY The Constitution of India provides for a single integrated judicial system. This means that unlike some other federal countries of the world, India does not have separate State courts. The structure of the judiciary in India is pyramidal with the Supreme Court at the top, High Courts below them and district and subordinate courts at the lowest level (see the diagram below). The lower courts function under the direct superintendence of the higher courts. Supreme Court of India Its decisions are binding on all courts. Can transfer Judges of High Courts. Can move cases from any court to itself. Can transfer cases from one High Court to Can hear appeals from lower courts. Can issue writs for restoring Fundamental Can deal with cases within the jurisdiction of the State. Exercises superintendence and control over courts below it. Deals with cases arising in the Considers appeals on decisions given by lower courts. Decides cases involving serious Consider cases of civil and criminal Chapter 6: Judiciary Jurisdiction of Supreme Court The Supreme Court of India is one of the very powerful courts anywhere in the world. However, it functions within the limitations imposed by the Constitution. The functions and responsibilities of the Supreme Court are defined by the Constitution. The Supreme Court has specific jurisdiction or scope of powers. courts in Civil, Can issue writs of Certiorari and Quo warranto to protect the Fundamental Rights of the Can grant special leave to an appeal from any judgement or matter passed by any court in the territory of India. Indian Constitution at Work Original jurisdiction means cases that can be directly considered by the Supreme Court without going to the lower courts before that. From the diagram above, you will notice that cases involving federal relations go directly to the Supreme Court. The Original Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court establishes it as an umpire in all disputes regarding federal matters.  In any federal country, legal disputes are bound to arise between the Union and the States; and among the States themselves. The power to resolve such cases is entrusted to the Supreme Court of India. It is called original jurisdiction because the Supreme Court alone has the power to deal with such cases. Neither the High Courts nor the lower courts can deal with such cases. In this capacity, the Supreme Court not just settles disputes but also interprets the powers of Union and State government as laid down in the Constitution. As you have already studied in the chapter on fundamental rights, any individual, whose fundamental right has been violated, can directly move the Supreme Court for remedy. The Supreme Court can give special orders in the form of writs. The High Courts can also issue writs, but the persons whose rights are violated have the choice of either approaching the High Court or approaching the Supreme Court directly. Through such writs, the Court can give orders to the executive to act or not to act in a particular way. The Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal. A person can appeal to the Supreme Court against the decisions of the High Court. However, High Court must certify that the case is fit for appeal, that is to say that it involves a serious matter of interpretation of law or Constitution. In addition, in criminal cases, if the lower court has sentenced a person to death then an appeal can be made to the High Court or Supreme Court. Of course, the Supreme Court holds the powers to decide whether to admit appeals even when appeal is not allowed by the High Court. Appellate jurisdiction means that the Supreme Court will reconsider the case and the legal issues involved Chapter 6: Judiciary in it. If the Court thinks that the law  or the Constitution has a different meaning from what the lower courts understood, then the Supreme Court will change the ruling and along with that also give new interpretation of the provision involved. The High Courts too, have appellate jurisdiction over the decisions given by courts below them. In addition to original and appellate jurisdiction, the Supreme Court of India possesses advisory jurisdiction also. This means that the President of India can refer any matter that is of public importance or that which involves interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice. However, the Supreme Court is not bound to give advice on such matters and the President is not bound to accept such an advice. What then is the utility of the advisory powers of the Supreme Court? The utility is two-fold. In the first place, it allows the government to seek legal opinion on a matter of importance before taking action on it. This may prevent unnecessary litigations later. Secondly, in the light of the advice of the Supreme Court, the government can make suitable changes in its action or legislations. Isn t it funny that giving advice is optional and accepting that advice is also optional? I thought that the Courts gave decisions that were binding!.. the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.   All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India shall act in aid of the Supreme Indian Constitution at Work Read the articles quoted above. These articles help us to understand the unified nature of our judiciary and the powers of the Supreme Court. Decisions made by the Supreme Court are binding on all other courts within the territory of India. Orders passed by it are enforceable throughout the length and breadth of the country. The Supreme Court itself is not bound by its decision and can at any time review it. Besides, if there is a case of contempt of the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court itself decides such a case. Check your progress Match the following State of Bihar and Union of India will be Appeal from District court of Haryana will go to Declaring a law Have you heard of the term judicial activism? Or, Public Both these terms are often used in the discussions about judiciary in recent times. Many people think that these two things have revolutionised the functioning of judiciary and made it more people-friendly. Why is the Supreme Court allowed to change its own ruling? Is it because courts can also make mistakes? Is it possible that the same judge is part of the  Bench  that revises the ruling and was also on the Bench that gave the ruling in the first place? Chapter 6: Judiciary The chief instrument through which judicial activism has flourished in India is Public Interest Litigation (PIL) or Social Action Litigation (SAL). What is PIL or SAL? How and when did it emerge? In normal course of law, an individual can approach the courts only if he/she has been personally aggrieved. That is to say, a person whose rights have been violated, or who is involved in a dispute, could move the court of law.  This concept underwent a change around 1979. In 1979, the Court set the trend when it decided to hear a case where the case was filed not by the aggrieved persons but by others on their behalf. As this case involved a consideration of an issue of public interest, it and such other cases came to be known as public interest litigations. Around the same time, the Supreme Court also took up the case about rights of prisoners. This opened the gates for large number of cases where public spirited citizens and voluntary organisations sought judicial intervention for protection of existing rights, betterment of life conditions of the poor, READ  A CARTOON Do you know that in recent times the judiciary has ruled that bandhs and hartals are illegal? Indian Constitution at Work protection of the environment, and many other issues in the interest of the public. PIL has become the most important vehicle of judicial activism. Judiciary, which is an institution that traditionally confined to responding to cases brought before it, began considering many cases merely on the basis of newspaper reports and postal complaints received by the court. Therefore, the term judicial activism became the more popular description of the role of the judiciary. Some Early PILs In 1979, newspapers published reports about  under trials. There were many prisoners in Bihar who had spent long years in jail, longer than what they would have spent if they had been punished for the offences for which they were arrested. This report prompted an advocate to file a petition. The Supreme Court heard this case. It became famous as one of the early Public Interest Litigations (PILs). This was the Hussainara  Khatoon vs. Bihar case. In 1980, a prison inmate of the Tihar jail managed to send a scribbled piece of paper to Justice Krishna Iyer of the Supreme Court narrating physical torture of the prisoners. The judge got it converted into a petition. Though later on, the Court abandoned the practice of considering letters, this case, known as Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration (1980) also became one of the pioneers of public interest litigation. Through the PIL, the court has expanded the idea of rights. Clean air, unpolluted water, decent living, etc., are rights for the entire society. Therefore, it was felt by the courts that individuals as parts of the society must have the right to seek justice wherever such rights were violated. Secondly, through PIL and judicial activism of the post-1980 period, the judiciary has also shown readiness to take into consideration rights of those sections who I have heard someone say that PIL means  private interest litigation. Why would that Chapter 6: Judiciary cannot easily approach the courts. For this purpose, the judiciary allowed public spirited citizens, social organisations and lawyers to file petitions on behalf of the needy and the deprived. It must be remembered that the problems of the poor  are qualitatively different from those which have hitherto occupied the attention of the Court and they need.a different kind of judicial approach. If we blindly follow the adversarial procedure in their case, they would never be able to enforce their fundamental rights.   Justice Bhagwati in Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs. Union of India, 1984. Find out the details about at least one case involving a PIL and study the way in which that case helped in serving public interest. Judicial activism has had manifold impact on the political system. It has democratised the judicial system by giving not just to individuals but also groups access to the courts. It has forced executive accountability. It has also made an attempt to make the electoral system much more free and fair.  The court asked candidates contesting elections to file affidavits indicating their assets and income along with educational qualifications so that the people could elect their representatives based on There is however a negative side to the large number of PILs and the idea of a proactive judiciary. In the first place it has overburdened the courts. Secondly, judicial activism has blurred the line of distinction between the executive and legislature on the one hand and the judiciary on the other. The court has been involved in resolving questions which belong to the executive. Thus, for I think judicial activism is more about telling the legislature and the executive what they should do. What will happen if the legislature and executive started Indian Constitution at Work instance, reducing air or sound pollution or investigating cases of corruption or bringing about electoral reform is not exactly the duty of the Judiciary. These are matters to be handled by the administration under the supervision of the legislatures. Therefore, some people feel that judicial activism has made the balance among the three organs of government very delicate. Democratic government is based on each organ of government respecting the powers and jurisdiction of the others. Judicial activism may be creating strains on this democratic principle. JUDICIARY AND RIGHTS We have already seen that the judiciary is entrusted with the task of protecting rights of individuals. The Constitution provides two ways in which the Supreme Court can remedy the violation of rights. First it can restore fundamental rights by issuing writs of Habeas Corpus; mandamus etc. (article 32). The High Courts also have the power to issue such writs (article 226). Secondly, the Supreme Court can declare the concerned law as unconstitutional and therefore non-operational (article 13). YOU ARE THE JUDGE A group of citizens from a city have approached the court through a PIL asking for an order to the city municipal authorities to remove slums and beautify the city in order to attract investors to the city. They argue that this is in the  public interest.  The residents of the slum localities have responded by saying that this will encroach on their right to life. They argue that right to life is more central to  public interest  than the right to a Imagine that you are the judge. Write a judgement deciding if the PIL involves  public interest. Chapter 6: Judiciary Together these two provisions of the Constitution establish the Supreme Court as the protector of fundamental rights of the citizen on the one hand and interpreter of Constitution on the other.  The second of the two ways mentioned above involves judicial review. Perhaps the most important power of the Supreme Court is the power of judicial review. Judicial Review means the power of the Supreme Court (or High Courts) to examine the constitutionality of any law if the Court arrives at the conclusion that the law is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution, such a law is declared as unconstitutional and inapplicable. The term judicial review is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution. However, the fact that India has a written constitution and the Supreme Court can strike down a law that goes against fundamental rights, implicitly gives the Supreme Court the power of judicial review. Besides, as we saw in the section on jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, in the case of federal relations too, the Supreme Court can use the review powers if a law is inconsistent with the distribution of powers laid down by the Constitution. Suppose, the central government makes a law, which according to some States, concerns a subject from the State list. Then the States can go to the Supreme Court and if the court agrees with them, it would declare that the law is unconstitutional. In this sense, the review power of the Supreme Court includes power to review legislations on the ground that they violate fundamental rights or on the ground that they violate the federal distribution of powers. The review power extends to the laws passed by State legislatures also. Together, the writ powers and the review power of the Court make judiciary very powerful. In particular, the review power means that the judiciary can interpret the Constitution and the laws passed by the legislature. Many people think that this feature enables the judiciary to protect the Constitution effectively and also to protect the rights of citizens. The practice of entertaining PILs has further added to the powers of the judiciary in protecting rights of citizens. I think I d rather become a judge! Then, I won t have to worry about elections and public support, and can still have really lots of power. Indian Constitution at Work Do you remember that in the chapter on rights we mentioned the right against exploitation? This right prohibits forced labour, trade in human flesh and prohibits employment of children in hazardous jobs. But the question is: how could those, whose rights were violated, approach the court? PIL and judicial activism made it possible for courts to consider these violations. Thus, the court considered a whole set of cases: the blinding of the jail inmates by the police, inhuman working conditions in stone quarries, sexual exploitation of children, and so on. This trend has made rights really meaningful for the poor and disadvantaged sections. Did you know that the practice of public interest litigation is now becoming more and more acceptable in many other countries? While many courts across the world, particularly in South Asia and Africa practice some form of judicial activism comparable to that of the Indian judiciary, the constitution of South Africa has incorporated public interest litigation in its bill of rights. Thus, in South Africa, it is a fundamental right of the citizen to bring before the Constitutional Court, cases of violation of other persons  Check your progress When does the Court use the review powers? What is the difference between judicial review JUDICIARY AND PARLIAMENT Apart from taking a very active stand on the matter of rights, the court has been active in seeking to prevent subversion of the Constitution through political practice. Thus, areas that were considered beyond the scope of judicial review such as powers of the President and Governor were brought under the purview of the Chapter 6: Judiciary There are many other instances in which the Supreme Court actively involved itself in the administration of justice by giving directions to executive agencies. Thus, it gave directions to CBI to initiate investigations against politicians and bureaucrats in the hawala case, the Narasimha Rao case, illegal allotment of petrol pumps case etc. You may have heard about some of these cases. Many of these instances are the products of judicial activism. The Indian Constitution is based on a delicate principle of limited separation of powers and checks and balances. This means that each organ of the government has a clear area of functioning. Thus, the Parliament is supreme in making laws and amending the Constitution, the executive is supreme in implementing them while the judiciary is supreme in settling disputes and deciding whether the laws that have been made are in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. Despite such clear cut division of power the conflict between the Parliament and judiciary, and executive and the judiciary has remained a recurrent theme in Indian politics. We have already mentioned the differences that emerged between the Parliament and the judiciary over right to property and the Parliament s power to amend the Constitution. Let us recapitulate Immediately after the implementation of the Constitution began, a controversy arose over the Parliament s power to restrict right to property. The Parliament wanted to put some restrictions on the right to hold property so that land reforms could be implemented. The Court held that the Parliament cannot thus restrict fundamental rights. The Parliament then tried to amend the Constitution. But the Court said that even through an amendment, a fundamental right cannot be abridged. The following issues were at the centre of the controversy between the Parliament and the judiciary. What is the scope of right to private property? What is the scope of the Parliament s power to curtail, abridge or abrogate fundamental rights? What is the scope of the Parliament s power to amend the Can the Parliament make laws that abridge fundamental rights while enforcing directive principles? Indian Constitution at Work During the period 1967 and 1973, this controversy became very serious. Apart from land reform laws, laws enforcing preventive detention, laws governing reservations in jobs, regulations acquiring private property for public purposes, and laws deciding the compensation for such acquisition of private property were some instances of the conflict between the legislature and the judiciary. In 1973, the Supreme Court gave a decision that has become very important in regulating the relations between the Parliament and the Judiciary since then. This case is famous as the Kesavananda Bharati case. In this case, the Court ruled that there is a basic structure of the Constitution and nobody not even the Parliament (through amendment) can violate the basic structure. The Court did two more things. First, it said that right to property (the disputed issue) was not part of basic structure and therefore could be suitably abridged. Secondly, the Court reserved to itself the right to decide whether various matters are part of the basic structure of the Constitution. This case is perhaps the best example of how judiciary uses its power to interpret the Constitution. This ruling has changed the nature of conflicts between the legislature and the judiciary. As we studied earlier, the right to property was taken away from the list of fundamental rights in 1979  While there can be no two opinions on the need for the maintenance of judicial independence,...it is also necessary to keep in view one important principle. The doctrine of independence is not to be raised to the level of a dogma so as to enable the judiciary to function as a kind of super-legislature or super - executive. The judiciary is there to interpret the Constitution or adjudicate upon the rights...  Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 837, 23 November 1949 Chapter 6: Judiciary and this also helped in changing the nature of the relationship between these two organs of government. Some issues still remain a bone of contention between the two   can the judiciary intervene in and regulate the functioning of the legislatures? In the parliamentary system, the legislature has the power to govern itself and regulate the behaviour of its members. Thus, the legislature can punish a person who the legislature holds guilty of breaching privileges of the legislature. Can a person who is held guilty for breach of parliamentary privileges seek protection of the courts? Can a member of the legislature against whom the legislature has taken disciplinary action get protection from the court? These issues are unresolved and are matters of potential conflict between the two. Similarly, the Constitution provides that the conduct of judges cannot be discussed in the Parliament. There have been several instances where the Parliament and State legislatures have cast aspersions on the functioning of the judiciary. Similarly, the judiciary too has criticised the legislatures and issued instructions to the legislatures about the conduct of legislative business. The legislatures see this as violating the principle of parliamentary sovereignty. These issues indicate how delicate the balance between any two organs of the government is and how important it is for each organ of the government in a democracy to respect the authority of others. Check your progress The main issues in the conflict between the judiciary and the Parliament have Appointment of judges Salaries and allowances of judges Scope of Parliament s power to amend the Constitution Interference by the Parliament in the functioning of the judiciary Why can t the Court tell us once and for all what are those aspects that are  basic structure  of the Constitution? Indian Constitution at Work In this chapter, we have studied the role of the judiciary in our democratic structure. In spite of the tensions that arose from time to time between the judiciary and the executive and the legislature, the prestige of the judiciary has increased considerably. At the same time, there are many more expectations from the judiciary. Ordinary citizens also wonder how it is possible for many people to get easy acquittals and how testimonies to suit the wealthy and the mighty. These are some issues about which our judiciary is concerned too. You have seen in this chapter that judiciary in India is a very powerful institution. This power has generated much awe and many hopes from it. Judiciary in India is also known for its independence. Through various decisions, the judiciary has given new interpretations to the Constitution and protected the rights of citizens. As we saw in this chapter, democracy hinges on the delicate balance of power between the judiciary and the Parliament and both institutions have to function within the How active is the judiciary in trying to curb corruption in public life? READ  A CARTOON R K Laxman in The Times of India. Chapter 6: Judiciary Indian Constitution at Work What are the different ways in which the independence of the judiciary is ensured? Choose the odd ones out. Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is consulted in the appointment of other judges of Supreme Court. Judges are generally not removed before the age of retirement. Judge of a High Court cannot be transferred to another High Parliament has no say in the appointment of judges. Does independence of the judiciary mean that the judiciary is not accountable to any one?  Write your answer in not more than 100 What are the different provisions in the constitution in order to maintain the independence of judiciary? Read the news report below and identify the following aspects: What is the case about? Who has been the beneficiary in the case? Who is the petitioner in the case? Visualise what would have been the different arguments put forward by the company. What arguments would the farmers have put forward? Supreme Court orders REL to pay Rs 300 crore to Dahanu Our Corporate Bureau 24 March 2005 Mumbai: The Supreme Court has ordered Reliance Energy to pay Rs. 300 crore to farmers who grow the chikoo fruit in the Dahanu area outside Mumbai. The order comes after the chikoo growers petitioned the court against the pollution caused by Reliance s thermal power plant. Dahanu, which is 150 km from Mumbai, was a self-sustaining agricultural and horticultural economy known for its fisheries and forests just over a decade ago, but was devastated in 1989 when a thermal power plant came into operation in the region. The next year, this fertile belt saw its first crop failure. Now, 70 Chapter 6: Judiciary per cent of the crop of what was once the fruit bowl of Maharashtra is gone. The fisheries have shut and the forest cover has thinned. Farmers and environmentalists say that fly ash from the power plant entered ground water and polluted the entire eco-system. The Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection Authority ordered the thermal station to set up a pollution control unit to reduce sulphur emissions, and in spite of a Supreme Court order backing the order the pollution control plant was not set up even by 2002. In 2003, Reliance acquired the thermal station and re-submitted a schedule for installation process in 2004. As the pollution control plant is still not set up, the Dahanu Taluka Environmental Protection Authority asked Reliance for a bank guarantee of Rs. Read the following news report and, Identify the governments at different levels Identify the role of Supreme Court What elements of the working of judiciary and executive can you identify in it? Identify the policy issues, matters related to legislation, implementation and interpretation of the law involved in this Centre, Delhi join hands on CNG issue By Our Staff Reporter, The Hindu 23 September 2001 NEW DELHI, SEPT. 22. The Centre and the Delhi Government today agreed to jointly approach the Supreme Court this coming week  for phasing out of all non-CNG commercial vehicles in the Capital. They also decided to seek a dual fuel policy for the city instead of putting the entire transportation system on the single-fuel mode  which was full of dangers and would result in It was also decided to discourage the use of CNG by private vehicle owners in the Capital. Both governments would press for allowing the use of 0.05 per cent low sulphur diesel for running of buses in the Capital. In addition, it would be pleaded before the Court that all commercial vehicles, which fulfil the Euro-II standards, should be allowed to ply in the city. Though both the Centre and the State would file separate affidavits, these would contain common points. The Centre would also go out and support the Delhi Government s stand on the issues concerning CNG. Indian Constitution at Work These decisions were taken at a meeting between the Delhi Chief Minister, Ms. Sheila Dikshit, and the Union Petroleum and Natural Gas Minister, Mr. Ram Naik. Ms. Dikshit said the Central Government would request the court that in view of the high powered Committee appointed under Dr. R.A. Mashelkar to suggest an  Auto Fuel Policy  for the entire country, it would be appropriate to extend the deadline as it was not possible to convert the entire 10,000-odd bus fleet into CNG during the prescribed time frame. The Mashelkar Committee is expected to submit its report within a period of six months. The Chief Minister said time was required to implement the court directives. Referring to the coordinated approach on the issue, Ms. Dikshit said this would take into account the details about the number of vehicles to be run on CNG, eliminating long queues outside CNG filling stations, the CNG fuel requirements of Delhi and the ways and means to implement the directive of The Supreme Court had  refused to relax the only CNG norm for the city s buses but said it had never insisted on CNG for taxis and auto rickshaws. Mr. Naik said the Centre would insist on allowing use of low sulphur diesel for buses in Delhi as putting the entire transportation system dependent on CNG could prove to be disastrous. The Capital relied on pipeline supply for CNG and any disruption would throw the public transport system out The following is a statement about Ecuador. What similarities or differences do you find between this example and the judicial system  It would be helpful if a body of common law, or judicial precedent, existed that could clarify a journalist s rights. Unfortunately, Ecuador s courts don t work that way. Judges are not forced to respect the rulings of higher courts in previous cases. Unlike the US, an appellate judge in Ecuador (or elsewhere in South America, for that matter) need not provide a written decision explaining the legal basis of a ruling. A judge may rule one way today and the opposite way, in a similar case, tomorrow, without explaining Chapter 6: Judiciary Read the following statements: Match them with the different jurisdictions the Supreme Court can exercise - Original, Appellate, The government wanted to know if it can pass a law about the citizenship status of residents of Pakistan-occupied areas of Jammu and Kashmir. In order to resolve the dispute about  river Cauvery  the government of Tamil Nadu wants to approach the court. Court rejected the appeal by people against the eviction from the dam site. 8. In what way can public interest litigation help the poor? 9. Do you think that judicial activism can lead to a conflict between the judiciary and the executive? Why? 10. How is judicial activism related to the protection of fundamental rights? Has it helped in expanding the scope of fundamental rights? Indian Constitution at Work Look at the political maps (on next two pages) of India 1947 and 2017. They have changed dramatically over the years. Boundaries of States have changed, names of States have changed, and the number of States has changed. When India became independent, we had a number of provinces that the British government had organised only for administrative convenience. Then a number of princely states merged with the newly independent Indian union. These were joined to the existing provinces. This is what you see in the first map. Since then boundaries of States have been reorganised many times. During this entire period, not only did boundaries of States change, but in some cases, even their names changed according to the wishes of the people of those States. Thus, Mysore changed to Karnataka and Madras became Tamil Nadu. The maps show these large scale changes that have taken place in the span of over seventy years. In a way, these maps also tell us the story of functioning of federalism in India. After studying this chapter you will be able to understand the following:   what is Federalism;   the federal provisions in the Indian Constitution;   the issues involved  in the relations between the centre and the States; and   the special provisions for certain States having a distinct composition and Chapter 7: Federalism INDIA IN 1947 Indian Constitution at Work Chapter 7: Federalism WHAT IS FEDERALISM? USSR was one of the world s super powers, but after 1989 it simply broke up into several independent countries. One of the major reasons for its break up was the excessive centralisation and concentration of power, and the domination of Russia over other languages and cultures of their own e.g. Uzbekistan. Some other countries like Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Pakistan also had to face a division of the country. Canada came very close to a break up between the English-speaking and the French-speaking regions of that country. Isn t it a great achievement that India, which emerged as an independent nation-state in 1947 after a painful partition, has remained united over seven decades of its independent existence? What accounts for this achievement? Can we attribute it to the federal structure of governance that we in India adopted through our Constitution? All the countries mentioned above, were federations. Yet they could not remain united. Therefore, apart from adopting a federal constitution, the nature of that federal system and the practice of federalism must also be Federalism in West Indies You may have heard about the cricket team of West Indies. But is there a country called West Indies? Like India, West Indies was also colonised by the federation of West Indies came into being. It had a weak central government and the economy of each unit was independent. These competition among the units led to the formal dissolution 1962. Later, in 1973 by the independent islands established joint authorities in the form of a common legislature, supreme court, a common currency, and, to a degree, a common market known as the Caribbean Community. The Caribbean Community has even a common executive, and Heads of the governments of members of this executive. Thus, the units could neither live together as one country, nor can they live Indian Constitution at Work India is a land of continental proportions and immense diversities. There are more than 20 major languages and several hundred minor ones. It is the home of several major religions. There are several million indigenous peoples living in different parts of the country. In spite of all these diversities we share a common land mass. We have also participated in a common history, especially, when we fought for independence. We also share many other important features. This has led our national leaders to visualise India as a country where there is unity in diversity. Sometimes it is described as unity with diversity. Federalism does not consist of a set of fixed principles, which are applied, to different historical situations. Rather, federalism as a principle of government has evolved differently in different situations. American federalism   one of the first major attempts to build a federal polity   is different from German or Indian federalism. But there are also a few key ideas and concepts associated with Essentially, federalism is an institutional mechanism to accommodate two sets of polities one at the regional level and the other at the national level. Each government is autonomous in its own sphere. In some federal countries, there is even a system of dual citizenship. India has only a single citizenship. The people likewise, have two sets of identities and loyalties they belong to the region as well as the nation, for example we are Gujaratis or Jharkhandis as well as Indians. Each level of the polity has distinct powers and responsibilities and has a separate system The details of this dual system of government are generally spelt out in a written constitution, which is considered to be supreme and which is also the source of the power of both sets of government. Certain subjects, which concern the nation as a whole, for example, defence or currency, are the responsibility of the union or central government. Regional or local I get it! It s like our school. We have our identity as students of class XI or XII and so on. And we also have competition among the various divisions. But we all belong to the school and are proud of it. Chapter 7: Federalism matters are the responsibility of the regional or State To prevent conflicts between the centre and the State, there is an independent judiciary to settle disputes. The judiciary has the powers to resolve disputes between the central government and the States on legal matters about the division of power. Real politics, culture, ideology and history determine the actual working of a federation. A culture of trust, cooperation, mutual respect and restraint helps federations to function smoothly. Political parties also determine the way a constitution would work. If any single unit or State or linguistic group or ideology comes to dominate the entire federation it could generate a deep resentment among people or its units not sharing the dominant voice. These situations could lead to demands for secession by the aggrieved units or could even result in civil wars. Many countries are embroiled in such conflict Yes, I remember what we read in the first chapter: a constitution decides who should have how much power. Indian Constitution at Work Federalism in Nigeria If the regions and various communities do not trust each other, even a federal arrangement can fail to produce unity. The example of Nigeria is instructive: Till 1914, Northern and Southern Nigeria were two separate British colonies. At the Ibadan Constitutional Conference of 1950 Nigerian leaders decided to form a federal constitution.  The three major ethnic groups of Nigeria Yoruba, Ibo and Hausa-Fulani controlled the regions of the West, the East and the North respectively. Their attempt to spread their influence to other regions led to fears and conflicts. These led to a military regime. In the 1960 constitution, both federal and regional governments jointly controlled the Nigerian police. In the military-supervised constitution of 1979, no state was allowed to have any civil police. Though democracy was restored in Nigeria in 1999, religious differences along with conflicts over who will control revenues from the oil resources continue to present problems before the Nigerian federation. Local ethnic communities resist centralised control of the oil resources. Thus, Nigeria is an example of overlap of religious, ethnic and economic differences among the units. Check your progress Who decides the powers of the central government in a federation? How are conflicts between the central government and the States resolved in a Chapter 7: Federalism FEDERALISM IN THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION Even before Independence, most leaders of our national movement were aware that to govern a large country like ours, it would be necessary to divide the powers between provinces and the central government. There was also awareness that Indian society had regional diversity and linguistic diversity. This diversity needed recognition. People of different regions and languages had to share power and in each region, people of that region should govern themselves. This was only logical if we wanted a The only question was what should be the extent of powers to be enjoyed by the regional governments. In view of the agitation of the Muslim League for greater representation to the Muslims, a compromise formula to give very large powers to the regions was discussed during the negotiations before Partition. Once the decision to partition India was taken, the Constituent Assembly decided to frame a government that would be based on the principles of unity and cooperation between the centre and the States and separate powers to the States. The most important feature of the federal system adopted by the Indian Constitution is the principle that relations between the States and the centre would be based on cooperation. Thus, while recognising diversity, the Constitution emphasised unity. Do you know for example, that the Constitution of India does not even mention the word federation? This is how the Constitution describes India   Article 1: (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States. (2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the After all, the purpose of living together must be that all of us are happy and must make each other be happy. Indian Constitution at Work Division of Powers There are two sets of government created by the Indian Constitution: one for the entire nation called the union government (central government) and one for each unit or State called the State government. Both of these have a constitutional status and clearly identified area of activity. If there is any dispute about which powers come under the control of the union and which under the States, this can be resolved by the Judiciary on the basis of the constitutional provisions. The Constitution clearly demarcates subjects, which are under the exclusive domain of the Union and those under the States. (Study the chart given on the next page carefully. It shows how powers are distributed between the centre and the States.) One of the important aspects of this division of powers is that economic and financial powers are centralised in the hands of the central government by the Constitution. The States have immense responsibilities but very meagre Check your progress Do you think that there is a need for mentioning Residuary powers Why do the States feel dissatisfied about the division of powers? I feel that States would have very little money of their own. How can they manage their affairs? It is like some families where the money is with the husband and the wife has to manage the household. Chapter 7: Federalism Constitution of India alone can make laws on these Normally only the can make laws on Both Union and alone can make laws on these Include all other matters not mentioned in any of the Lists. Union Legislature alone has the power to legislate on such Indian Constitution at Work FEDERALISM WITH A STRONG CENTRAL GOVERNMENT It is generally accepted that the Indian Constitution has created a strong central government. India is a country of continental dimensions with immense diversities and social problems. The framers of the Constitution believed that we required a federal constitution that would accommodate diversities. But they also wanted to create a strong centre to stem disintegration and bring about social and political change. It was necessary for the centre to have such powers because India at the time of independence was not only divided into provinces created by the British; but there were more than 500 princely states which had to be integrated into existing States or new States had to be created.  Let me tell my honourable Friends in the House that the drift  in all constitutions has been towards the centre... because of circumstances that have now come into being that the States have become,...federal or unitary, welfare states from being Police States and the ultimate responsibility as for the economic well-being of the country responsibility of the centre.  T.T. Krishnamachari, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 955-956, 25 November 1949 Besides the concern for unity, the makers of the Constitution also believed that the socio-economic problems of the country needed to be handled by a strong central government in cooperation with the States. Poverty, illiteracy and inequalities of wealth were some of the problems that required planning and coordination. Thus, the concerns for unity and development prompted the makers of the Constitution to create a strong central government. Let us look at the important provisions that create a strong central Chapter 7: Federalism The very existence of a State including its territorial integrity is in the hands of Parliament. The Parliament is empowered to  form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States. It can also alter the boundary of any State or even its name. The Constitution provides for some safeguards by way of securing the view of the concerned State legislature. The Constitution has certain very powerful emergency provisions, which can turn our federal polity into a highly centralised system once emergency is declared. During an emergency, power becomes lawfully centralised. Parliament also assumes the power to make laws on subjects within the jurisdiction of Even during normal circumstances, the central government has very effective financial powers and responsibilities. In the first place, items generating revenue are under the control of the central government. Thus, the central government has many revenue sources and the States are mostly dependent on the grants and financial assistance from the centre. Secondly, India adopted planning as the instrument of rapid economic progress and development after independence. Planning led to considerable centralisation of economic decision making. Planning commission appointed by the union government is the coordinating machinery that controls and supervises the resources management of the States. Besides, the Union government uses its discretion to give grants and loans to States. This distribution of economic resources is considered lopsided and has led to charges of discrimination against States ruled by an opposition party. As you will study later, the Governor has certain powers to recommend dismissal of the State government and the dissolution of the Assembly. Besides, even in normal circumstances, the Governor I now understand why our Constitution is not only about borrowing from others. It must have designed federalism according to our needs. Indian Constitution at Work has the power to reserve a bill passed by the State legislature, for the assent of the President.  This gives the central government an opportunity to delay the State legislation and also to examine such bills and veto them completely. There may be occasions when the situation may demand that the central government needs to legislate on matters from the State list. This is possible if the move is ratified by the Rajya Sabha. The Constitution clearly states that executive powers of the centre are superior to the executive powers of the States. Furthermore, the central government may choose to give instructions to the State government. The following extract from an article of the Constitution makes this clear. Article 257 (1):  The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose. You have already studied in the chapter on executive that we have an integrated administrative system. The all-India services are common to the entire territory of India and officers chosen for these services serve in the administration of the States. Thus, an IAS officer who becomes the collector or an IPS officer who serves as the Commissioner of Police, are under the control of the central government. States can neither take disciplinary action nor can they remove these officers Oh! The central government appears to me to be all- powerful. Don t the States complain about it? Chapter 7: Federalism Articles 33 and 34 authorise the Parliament to protect persons in the service of the union or a state in respect of any action taken by them during martial law to maintain or restore order. This provisions further strengthens the powers of the union government. The Armed Forces Special Powers Act has been made on the basis of these provisions. This Act has created tensions between the people and the armed forces on some occasions. Check your progress Give two reasons for the claim that our Constitution has a unitary bias. Do you think that: a strong centre makes the States weak? strong States will weaken the centre? CONFLICTS IN INDIA S FEDERAL SYSTEM In the previous section, we have seen that the Constitution has vested very strong powers in the centre. Thus, the Constitution recognises the separate identity of the regions and yet gives more powers to the centre. Once the principle of identity of the State is accepted, it is quite natural that the States would expect a greater role and powers in the governance of the State and the country as a whole. This leads to various demands from the States. From time to time, States have demanded that they should be given more powers and more autonomy. This leads to tensions and conflicts in the relations between the centre and the States. While the legal disputes between the centre and the States (or between States) can be resolved by the  judiciary, demands for autonomy are of political nature and need to be resolved The Constitution is only a framework or a skeleton, its flesh and blood is provided by the actual processes of politics. Hence federalism Indian Constitution at Work in India has to a large extent been influenced by the changing nature of the political process. In the 1950s and early 1960s the foundation of our federalism was laid under Jawaharlal Nehru. It was also a period of Congress dominance over the centre as well as the States. Except on the issue of formation of new States, the relations between the centre and the States remained quite normal during this period. The States were hopeful that they would be making progress with the help of the grants-in-aid from the centre. Besides, there was considerable optimism about the policies of socio-economic development designed by the centre. In the middle of the 1960s Congress dominance declined somewhat and in a large number of States opposition parties came to power. It resulted in demands for greater powers and greater autonomy to the States. In fact, these demands were a direct fallout of the fact that different parties were ruling at the centre and in many States. So, the State governments were protesting against what they saw as unnecessary interference in their governments by the Congress government at the centre. The Congress too, was not very comfortable with the idea of dealing with governments led by opposition parties. This peculiar political context gave birth to a discussion about the concept of autonomy under a federal system. Finally, since the 1990s, Congress dominance has largely ended and we have entered an era of coalition politics especially at the centre. In the States too, different parties, both national and regional, have come to power. This has resulted in a greater say for the States, a respect for diversity and the beginning of a more mature federalism. Thus, it is in the second phase that the issue of autonomy became very potent politically. Demands for Autonomy Many States and even many political parties have, from time to time, demanded that States should have more autonomy vis- -vis the central government. However, This is quite interesting. So, laws and constitutions alone do not decide everything. After all, actual politics decides the nature of our government! Chapter 7: Federalism  autonomy  refers to different things for different States Sometimes, these demands expect that the division of powers should be changed in favour of the States and more powers and important powers be assigned to the States. Many States (Tamil Nadu, Punjab, West Bengal) and many parties (DMK, Akali Dal, CPI-M) have made demands of autonomy from time to time. Another demand is that States should have independent sources of revenue and greater control over the resources. This is also known as financial autonomy. In 1977, the Left Front Government in West Bengal brought out a document demanding a restructuring of centre-State relations in India. In the autonomy demands of Tamil Nadu and Punjab also, there was an implicit support to the idea of greater financial powers. The third aspect of the autonomy demands relates to administrative powers of the States. States resent the control of the centre over the administrative machinery. demands may also be related to cultural and linguistic issues. The domination of Hindi (in Tamil Nadu) or demand for advancing the Punjabi language and culture are instances of this. Some States also feel that there is a domination of the over the others. In fact, during the decade of agitations in some States against the imposition of the Hindi language. Yes, I know that Hindi is India s official language.  But many of my friends from different parts of the country don t know Hindi. During discussion on the national language in the Constituent Assembly, Nehru had to appeal to the Hindi- speaking provinces to show greater tolerance towards Don t spare me Shankar, p.24 READ A CARTOON Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 18 September 1949 Indian Constitution at Work Role of Governors and President s Rule The role of Governors has always been a controversial issue between the States and the central government. The Governor is not an elected office-holder. Many Governors have been retired military officers or civil servants or politicians. Besides, the Governor is appointed by the central government and therefore, actions of the Governor are often viewed as interference by the Central government in the functioning of the State government. When two different parties are in power at the centre and the State, the role of the Governor becomes even more controversial. The Sarkaria Commission that was appointed by the central government (1983; it submitted its report in 1988) to examine the issues relating to centre-State relations, recommended that appointments of Governors should be strictly non-partisan. Powers and role of the Governor become controversial for one more reason. One of the most controversial articles in the Constitution is Article 356, which provides for President s rule in any State. This provision is to be applied, when  a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.  It results in the takeover of the State government by the Union government. The President s proclamation has to be ratified by Parliament. President s rule can be extended till three years. The Governor has the power to recommend the dismissal of the State government and suspension or dissolution of State assembly. This has led to many conflicts. In some cases, State governments were dismissed even when they had a majority in the legislature, as had happened in Kerala in 1959 or without testing their majority, as happened in several other States after 1967. Some cases went to the Supreme Court and the Court has ruled that constitutional validity of the decision to impose President s rule can be examined by the READ A CARTOON  When Nehru was appointing governors, some were reluctant to quit ministerial chairs.  Don t spare me Shankar, p.89 Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 27 April 1952 Chapter 7: Federalism Article 356 was very sparingly used till 1967. After 1967 many States had non- Congress governments and the Congress was in power at the centre. The centre has often used this provision to dismiss State governments or has used the office of the Governor to prevent the majority party or coalition from assuming office. For instance, the central government removed elected governments in Andhra Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir in the decade of 1980s. Demands for New States The other dimension of tension in our federal system has been the demand to create new States. The national movement not only created a pan-Indian national unity; it also generated distinct unity around a common language, region and culture. Our national movement was also a movement for democracy. Therefore, in the course of the national movement itself, it was decided that as far as possible, States would be created on the basis of common cultural and This ultimately led to the demand for the creation of READ A CARTOON Toppling the State governments. Everyone loves to play this game! READ A CARTOON Flood of demands for creating new States Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. R K Laxman in The Times of India. 26 July 1953 Indian Constitution at Work linguistic States after Independence. In December 1953, the States Reorganisation Commission was set up and it recommended the creation of linguistic States, at least for the major linguistic groups. In 1956, reorganisation of some States took place. This saw the beginning of the creation of linguistic States and the process is still continuing. Gujarat and Maharashtra were created in 1960; Punjab and Haryana were separated from each other in 1966. Later, the North Eastern region was reorganised and new States like  Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were created. Make a list of the States of India and find out the year in which each of the States In 2000, some of the larger States were further divided both to meet the demands for a separate State as well as to meet the need for greater administrative efficiency. Thus Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar were divided to create three new States. They are: Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand respectively. In 2014, the State of Telangana was formed by dividing Andhra Pradesh. Some regions and linguistic groups are still struggling for separate Statehood like Vidarbha in While the States keep fighting with the centre over autonomy and other issues like the share in revenue resources, there have been many instances of disputes between two States or among more than two States. It is true that the judiciary acts as the arbitration mechanism on disputes of a legal nature but these disputes are in reality not just legal. They have political implications and therefore they can best be resolved only through negotiations and mutual understanding. So, federalism is all about conflicts! First, we talked about Centre-State conflicts and now conflict among States. Can t we live together peacefully? Chapter 7: Federalism Broadly, two types of disputes keep recurring. One is the border dispute. States have certain claims over territories belonging to neighbouring States. Though language is the basis of defining boundaries of the States, often border areas would have populations speaking more than one language. So, it is not easy to resolve this dispute merely on the basis of linguistic majority. One of the long- standing border disputes is the dispute between Maharashtra and Karnataka over the city of Belgaum. Manipur and Nagaland too, have a long-standing border dispute. The carving out of Haryana from the erstwhile State of Punjab has led to dispute between the two States not only over border areas, but over the capital city of Chandigarh. This city today houses the capital of both these States. In 1985, the then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi reached an understanding with the leadership of Punjab. According to this understanding, Chandigarh was to be handed over to Punjab. But this has not While border disputes are more about sentiment, the disputes over the sharing of river waters are even more serious, because they are related to problems of drinking water and agriculture in the concerned States. You might have heard about the  Kaveri  water dispute. This is a major issue between Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Farmers in both the States are dependent on Cauvery waters. Though there is a river water tribunal to settle water disputes, this dispute has reached the Supreme Court. In another similar dispute Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra are battling over sharing the waters of Narmada river. Rivers are a major resource and therefore, disputes over river waters test the patience and cooperative spirit of the States. Collect information about at least one dispute about river waters involving two or more States. Yes, conflict over Governors, over language, over borders and over water.and yet we manage to live together! Indian Constitution at Work The most extra-ordinary feature of the federal arrangement created in India is that many States get a differential treatment. We have already noted in the chapter on Legislature that the size and population of each State being different, an asymmetrical representation is provided in the Rajya Sabha. While ensuring minimum representation to each of the smaller States, this arrangement also ensures that larger States would get more representation. In the case of division of powers, too, the Constitution provides a division of powers that is common to all the States.  And yet, the Constitution has some special provisions for some States given their peculiar social and historical circumstances. Most of the special provisions pertain to the north eastern States (Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, etc.) largely due to their sizeable indigenous tribal population with a distinct history and culture. However, these provisions have not been able to stem alienation and the insurgency in parts of the region. Special provisions also exist for hilly States like Himachal Pradesh and some other States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra Sikkim and Jammu and Kashmir The other State which had a special status was Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) (Art. 370). Jammu and Kashmir was one of the large princely States, which had the option of joining India or Pakistan or remaining independent. Check your progress Why do States want more autonomy? What is the difference between autonomy I now understand what they meant by  intelligent and balanced design  in the first Chapter 7: Federalism However, immediately after independence in October, 1947 Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced the Maharaja Hari Singh to ask for Indian help and acceded to the Many of the Muslim majority areas in the Western and Eastern parts joined Pakistan but J&K was an exception. Under these circumstances, it was given much greater autonomy by the Constitution. According to Article 370, the concurrence of the State was required for making any laws in matters mentioned in the Union and Concurrent lists. This was different from the position of other states. In the case of the other States, the division of powers as listed through three lists automatically applies. In the case of Jammu and Kashmir, the central government had only limited powers and other powers listed in the Union list and Concurrent list could be used only with the consent of the State government. This gave greater autonomy to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Earlier, there was a constitutional provision that allowed the President, with the concurrence of the State government, to specify which parts of the Union list should apply to the State. The President had issued two Constitutional orders in concurrence with the government of J&K making large parts of the Constitution applicable to the State. As a result, though J&K had a separate constitution and a flag, the Parliament s power to make laws on subjects in the Union List was fully accepted. The remaining difference between the other States and the State of J&K were that no emergency due to internal disturbances could be declared in J&K without the concurrence of the State. The Union government could not impose a financial emergency in the State and the Directive Principles did not apply in J&K. Amendments to the Indian Constitution (under Art. 368) could apply in concurrence with the government of J&K. At present, the special status given under 370 no longer exists. By the Jammu and Kashmir reorganisation Act 2019, the State has been bifurcated into two Union Territories viz., (i) Jammu and Kashmir and (ii) Ladakh. The new arrangement has come into effect from 31 October, 2019. Indian Constitution at Work Federalism is like a rainbow, where each colour is separate, yet together they make a harmonious pattern. Federalism has to continuously maintain a difficult balance between the centre and the States. No legal or institutional formula can guarantee the smooth functioning of a federal polity. Ultimately, the people and the political process must develop a culture and a set of values and virtues like mutual trust, toleration and a spirit of cooperation. Federalism celebrates both unity as well as diversity. National unity cannot be built by streamlining differences. Such forced unity only generates greater social strife and alienation and tends finally to destroy unity. A responsive polity sensitive to diversities and to the demands for autonomy can alone be the basis of a cooperative federation. 1. From the list of following events which ones would you identify with the functioning of federalism? Why? The Centre on Tuesday announced Sixth Schedule status to GNLF-led Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, which would ensure greater autonomy to the governing body in the Hill district of West Bengal. A tripartite Memorandum of Settlement was signed in New Delhi between the Centre, West Bengal government and the Subhas Ghising-led Gorkha National Liberation Front (GNLF) after two days of hectic deliberations. Government for action plan for rain-hit States: Centre has asked the rain-ravaged States to submit detailed plans for reconstruction to enable it to respond to their demands for extra New Commissioner for Delhi: The Capital is getting a new municipal commissioner. Confirming this, present MCD Commissioner Rakesh Mehta said he has received his transfer orders and that he is likely to be replaced by IAS officer Ashok Kumar, who is serving as the Chief Secretary in Arunachal Pradesh. Mehta, a 1975 batch IAS officer, has been heading the MCD for about three-and-a-half years. Chapter 7: Federalism CU Status for Manipur University: Rajya Sabha on Wednesday passed a Bill to convert the Manipur University into a Central University with the Human Resource Development Minister promising such institutions in the North Eastern States of Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Sikkim as well. Funds released: The Centre has released Rs. 553 lakh to Arunachal Pradesh under its rural water supply scheme. The first instalment was of Rs. 466.81 lakh. We ll teach the Biharis how to live in Mumbai: Around 100 Shiv Sainiks stormed J. J. Hospital, disrupted daily operations, raised slogans and threatened to take matters into their own hands if no action was taken against non-Maharashtrian students. Demand for dismissal of Government: The Congress Legislature Party (CLP) in a representation submitted to State Governor recently, has demanded dismissal of the ruling Democratic Alliance of Nagaland (DAN) government for its alleged financial mismanagement and embezzlement of public money. NDA government asks naxalites to surrender arms: Amid a walkout by opposition RJD and its allies Congress and CPI (M), the Bihar government today appealed to the naxalites to shun the path of violence and reaffirmed its pledge to root out unemployment to usher in a new era of development in Bihar. 2. Think which of the following statements would be correct. State Federalism enhances the possibility of people from different regions to interact without the fear of one s culture being imposed upon them by others. Federal system will hinder easier economic transaction between two different regions that have distinct types of resources. A federal system will ensure that the powers of those at the centre will remain limited. 3. Based on the first few articles of Belgian constitution   given below   explain how federalism is visualised in that country.  Try and write a similar Article for the Constitution of India. Title I: On Federal Belgium, its components and its Indian Constitution at Work Article 1: Belgium is a Federal State made up of communities and regions. Article 2: Belgium is made up of three communities: The French Community, the Flemish Community and the Article 3: Belgium is made up of three regions: The Walloon region, the Flemish region and the Brussels region. Article 4: Belgium has four linguistic regions: The French- speaking region, the Dutch-speaking region, the bilingual region of Brussels Capital and the German-speaking region. Each  commune  (county borough) of the Kingdom is part of one of these linguistic regions... Article 5: The Walloon region is made up of the following provinces: The Walloon Brabant, Hainault, Liege, Luxemburg and Namur. The Flemish region is made up of the following provinces: Antwerp, the Flemish Brabant, West Flanders, East Flanders and Limburg.   4. Imagine that you were to rewrite the provisions regarding federalism. Write an essay of not more than 300 words making your suggestions a. division of powers  among the centre and the States, b. distribution of financial resources, c. methods of resolving inter-State disputes and d. appointment of Governors 5. Which of the following should be the basis for formation of a State? Common economic interests 6. Majority of people from the States of north India   Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar speak Hindi. If all these States are combined to form one State, would it be in tune with the idea of federalism? Give arguments. 7. List four features of the Indian Constitution that give greater power to the central government than the State government. 8. Why are many States unhappy about the role of the Governor? Chapter 7: Federalism 9. President s rule can be imposed in a State if the government is not being run according to the provisions of the Constitution. State whether any of the following conditions are a fit case for imposition of President s rule in the State. Give reasons. two members of the State legislative assembly belonging to the main opposition party have been killed by criminals and the opposition is demanding dismissal of the State government. Kidnapping of young children for ransom is on rise. The number of crimes against women are increasing. No political party has secured majority in the recent elections of the State Legislative Assembly. It is feared that some MLAs from the other parties may be lured to support a political party in return for money. Different political parties are ruling in the State and at the centre and they are bitter opponents of each other. More than 2000 people have been killed in the communal riots. In the water dispute between the two States, one State government refused to follow the decision of the Supreme Court. 10. What are the demands raised by States in their quest for greater 11. Should some States be governed by special provisions? Does this create resentment among other States? Does this help in forging greater unity among the regions of the country? Indian Constitution at Work In a democracy, it is not sufficient to have an elected government at the centre and at the State level. It is also necessary that even at the local level, there should be an elected government to look after local affairs. In this chapter, you will study the structure of local government in our country. You will also study the importance of the local governments and ways to give them independent powers. After studying this chapter, you will know:   the importance of local government bodies;   the provisions made by the 73rd and 74th amendments; and   functions and responsibilities of the local government bodies. Chapter 8: Local Governments WHY LOCAL GOVERNMENTS? Geeta Rathore belongs to Jamonia Talab Gram Panchayat, Sehore district, Madhya Pradesh. She was elected Sarpanch in 1995 from a reserved seat; but in 2000, the village people rewarded her for her admirable work by electing her again - this time from a non-reserved seat. From a housewife, Geeta has grown into a leader displaying political farsightedness - she has harnessed the collective energy of her Panchayat to renovate water tanks, build a school building, construct village roads, fight against domestic violence and atrocities against women, create environmental awareness, and encourage afforestation and water management in her village.  Panchayati Raj Update, Vol. XI, No. 3, February 2004. There is another story of yet another woman achiever. She was the President (Sarpanch) of a Gram Panchayat of Vengaivasal village in Tamil Nadu. In 1997, the Tamil Nadu government allotted two hectares of land to 71 government employees. This piece of land fell within the vicinity of this Gram Panchayat. On the instructions of higher authorities the District Collector of Kancheepuram directed the President of the Gram Panchayat to pass a resolution endorsing the allotment of the said land for the purpose already decided. The President and the Gram Panchayat refused to pass such an order and the Collector issued an order to acquire the land. The Gram Panchayat filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court against the Collector s action. The single judge bench of the High Court upheld the Collector s order and ruled that there was no need to take the Panchayat s consent. The Panchayat appealed to the Division bench against the single judge s order. In its order, the Division Bench reversed the order of the single judge. The judges held that the government order amounted to not only infringement of the powers of the Panchayats but a gross violation of the constitutional status of the Panchayats.   Panchayati Raj Update, Vol. XII, Both these stories are not isolated incidents. They are representative of a larger transformation that is taking place across India especially after constitutional status was accorded to local government institutions in 1993. But aren t there cases of male members of the village panchayat harassing the woman Sarpanch in some places? Why are men not happy when women assume positions of Indian Constitution at Work Local government is government at the village and district level. Local government is about government closest to the common people. Local government is about government that involves the day-to-day life and problems of ordinary citizens. Local government believes that local knowledge and local interest are essential ingredients for democratic decision making. They are also necessary for efficient and people-friendly administration. The advantage of local government is that it is so near the people. It is convenient for the people to approach the local government for solving their problems both quickly and with minimum cost. In the story of Geeta Rathore, we noticed that she was able to bring about a significant change in Jamonia Talab because of her pro-active role as Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.  Vengaivasal village is able to still retain its land and the right to decide what to do with it because of the relentless efforts of its Gram Panchayat President and members. So, local governments can be very effective in protecting the local interests of the Democracy is about meaningful participation. It is also about accountability. Strong and vibrant local governments ensure both active participation and purposeful accountability. Geeta Rathore s story is one of committed participation. Vengaivasal village Gram Panchayat s relentless efforts to secure its rights over its own land were an example of a mission to ensure accountability.  It is at the level of local government that common citizens can be involved in decision making concerning their lives, their needs and above all their It is necessary that in a democracy, tasks, which can be performed locally, should be left in the hands of the local people and their representatives. Common people are more familiar with their local government than with the government at the State or national level. They are also more concerned with what local government does or has failed to do as it has a direct bearing and impact on Is it possible that we only had governments at the local level and a coordinating body at the national level? I think Mahatma Gandhi advocated some ideas along these lines. Chapter 8: Local Governments their day-to-day life. Thus, strengthening local government is like strengthening democratic processes. Check your progress How does local government strengthen In the example given above, what do you think the Government of Tamil Nadu should have GROWTH OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN INDIA Let us now discuss how local government has grown in India and what our Constitution says about it. It is believed that self-governing village communities existed in India from the earliest times in the form of  sabhas  (village assemblies). In the course of time, these village bodies took the shape of Panchayats (an assembly of five persons) and these Panchayats resolved issues at the village level. Their role and functions kept on changing at different points of time. In modern times, elected local government bodies were created after 1882. Lord Rippon, who was the Viceroy of India at that time, took the initiative in creating these bodies. They were called the local boards. However, due to slow progress in this regard, the Indian National Congress urged the government to take necessary steps to make all local bodies more effective. Following the Government of India Act 1919, village panchayats were established in a number of provinces. This trend continued after the Government of India Act of 1935. During India s freedom movement, Mahatma Gandhi had strongly pleaded for decentralisation of economic and political power. He believed that strengthening village panchayats was a means of effective decentralisation. All development initiatives must have local involvement in I don t know about the past, but I suspect that a non-elected village panchayat would naturally be dominated by the village elders, the rich and men from upper strata. Indian Constitution at Work order to be successful.  Panchayats therefore were looked upon as instruments of decentralisation and participatory democracy.  Our national movement was concerned about the enormous concentration of powers in the hands of the Governor General sitting at Delhi. Therefore, for our leaders, independence meant an assurance that there will be decentralisation of decision making, executive and The independence of India should mean the independence of the whole of India Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus every village will be a republic... It follows therefore that every village has to be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs. In this structure composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever- widening, ever-ascending circles. Life will be a pyramid with the apex sustained by the bottom - Mahatma Gandhi When the Constitution was prepared, the subject of local government was assigned to the States. It was also mentioned in the Directive Principles as one of the policy directives to all governments in the country. As you have read in Chapter 2, being a part of the Directive Principles of State Policy, this provision of the Constitution was non-justiciable and primarily advisory in its nature. It is felt that the subject of local government including panchayats did not receive adequate importance in the Constitution. Do you know why this happened? A few reasons can be advanced here. Firstly, the turmoil due to the Partition resulted in a strong unitary inclination in the Constitution. Nehru himself looked upon extreme localism as a threat to unity and integration of the nation. Secondly, there was a powerful voice in the Constituent Assembly led by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar which felt that the faction and caste-ridden nature of rural society would defeat the noble purpose of local government at the rural level. However, nobody denied the importance of people s participation in development planning. Many members of the Constituent Assembly wanted Village Panchayats to be the basis of democracy Chapter 8: Local Governments in India but they were concerned about factionalism and many other ills present in the villages.   in the interests of democracy, the villages maybe trained in the art of autonomy... We must be able to reform the villages and principles of government Local Governments in Independent India Local governments got a fillip after the 73rd and 74th Constitution Amendment Acts. But even before that, some efforts in the direction of developing local government bodies had already taken place. First in the line was the Community Development Programme in 1952, which sought to promote people s participation in local development in a range of activities. In this background, a three-tier Panchayati Raj system of local government was recommended for the rural areas. Some States (like Gujarat, Maharashtra) adopted the system of elected local bodies around 1960. But in many States those local bodies did not have enough powers and functions to look after the local development. They were very much dependent on the State and central governments for financial assistance. Many States did not think it necessary to establish elected local bodies. In many instances, local bodies were dissolved and the local government was handed over to government officers. Many States had indirect elections to most local bodies. In many States, elections to the local bodies were postponed from time to time. Why are people afraid of factionalism at the village level when all the political parties and organisations or even my class has factions? Are groups and factions always so bad? Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, CAD, Vol. VII, p. 428, 17 November 1948 Indian Constitution at Work After 1987, a thorough review of the functioning of local government institutions was initiated. In 1989 the P.K.Thungon Committee recommended constitutional recognition for the local government bodies. A constitutional amendment to provide for periodic elections to local government institutions, and enlistment of appropriate functions to them, along with funds, was recommended. Check your progress Both Nehru and Dr. Ambedkar were not very enthusiastic about local government bodies. Did they have similar objections to local What was the constitutional provision about local governments before 1992? Which were the States that had established local government during the 1960s and 73RD AND 74TH AMENDMENTS In 1989, the central government introduced two constitutional amendments. These amendments aimed at strengthening local governments and ensuring an element of uniformity in their structure and functioning across the country. The Constitution of Brazil has created States, Federal Districts and Municipal Councils.  Each of these is assigned independent powers and jurisdiction. Just as the Republic cannot interfere in the affairs of the States (except on grounds provided by the constitution), states are prohibited from interfering in the affairs of the municipal councils. This provision protects the powers of the local government. Later in 1992, the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments were passed by the Parliament.  The 73rd Amendment is about rural local governments (which are also known as Panchayati Raj Institutions Chapter 8: Local Governments or PRIs) and the 74th amendment made the provisions relating to urban local government (Nagarpalikas).  The 73rd and 74th Amendments came into force in 1993. We have noticed earlier that local government is a  State subject. States are free to make their own laws on this subject. But once the Constitution was amended, the States had to change their laws about local bodies in order to bring these in conformity with the amended Constitution. They were given one year s time for making necessary changes in their respective State laws in the light of these Let us now examine the changes brought about by the 73rd amendment in Panchayati Raj institutions. Three Tier Structure All States now have a uniform three tier Panchayati Raj structure. At the base is the  Gram Panchayat. A Gram Panchayat covers a village or group of villages. The intermediary level is the Mandal (also referred to as Block or Taluka). These bodies are called Mandal or Taluka Panchayats. The intermediary level body need not be constituted in smaller States. At the apex is the Zilla Panchayat covering the entire rural area of the District. The amendment also made a provision for the mandatory creation of the Gram Sabha. The Gram Sabha would comprise all the adult members registered as voters in the Panchayat area. Its role and functions are decided by State legislation. All the three levels of Panchayati Raj institutions are elected directly by the people. The term of each Panchayat body is five years. If the State government dissolves the Panchayat before the end of its five year term, Does a Gram sabha mean the democratic forum of the entire village? Do Gram sabhas actually meet regularly? If I understand this correctly, the centre forced local government reforms on the States. This is funny: you adopt decentralisation through a Indian Constitution at Work fresh elections must be held within six months of such dissolution. This is an important provision that ensures the existence of elected local bodies. Before the 73rd amendment, in many States, there used to be indirect elections to the district bodies and there was no provision for immediate elections after dissolution. One third of the positions in all panchayat institutions are reserved for women. Reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also provided for at all the three levels, in proportion to their population. If the States find it necessary, they can also provide for reservations for the other backward classes (OBCs). It is important to note that these reservations apply not merely to ordinary members in Panchayats but also to the positions of Chairpersons or  Adhyakshas  at all the three levels.  Further, reservation of one-third of the seats for women is not merely in the general category of seats but also within the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward castes. This means that a seat may be reserved simultaneously for a woman candidate and one belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes. Thus, a Sarpanch would have to be a Dalit woman or an Adivasi woman. Transfer of Subjects Twenty-nine subjects, which were earlier in the State list of subjects, are identified and listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. These subjects are to be transferred to the Panchayati Raj institutions. These subjects were mostly linked to development and welfare functions at the local level.  The actual transfer of these functions depends upon the State legislation. Each State decides how many of these twenty-nine subjects would be transferred to the local bodies. We read in the chapter on Elections that the bill for reservations for women in the Assemblies and in the Parliament could not be passed. How come women s reservations in local bodies were accepted so easily? Chapter 8: Local Governments Why are subjects only from State list to be transferred? Why can t we transfer some subjects from the Union List also? Some subjects listed in the eleventh schedule Minor irrigation, water management and Small scale industries, including food 10. Rural housing. 11. Drinking water. 13. Roads, culverts,. 14. Rural electrification,. 16. Poverty alleviation programme. 17. Education, including primary and 18. Technical training and vocational 19. Adult and non-formal education. 21. Cultural activities. 22. Markets and fairs. 23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and     dispensaries. 24. Family welfare. 25. Women and child development. 26. Social welfare,   27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the 28. Public distribution system. Article 243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats., the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority.  with respect to...the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule. Indian Constitution at Work The provisions of the 73rd amendment were not made applicable to the areas inhabited by the Adivasi populations in many States of India. In 1996, a separate act was passed extending the provisions of the Panchayat system to these areas. Many Adivasi communities have their traditional customs of managing common resources such as forests and small water reservoirs, etc. Therefore, the new act protects the rights of these communities to manage their resources in ways acceptable to them. For this purpose, more powers are given to the Gram Sabhas of these areas and elected village panchayats have to get the consent of the Gram Sabha in many respects. The idea behind this act is that local traditions of self government should be protected while introducing modern elected bodies. This is only consistent with the spirit of diversity and decentralisation. State Election Commissioners The State government is required to appoint a State Election Commissioner who would be responsible for conducting elections to the Panchayati Raj institutions. Earlier, this task was performed by the State administration which was under the control of the State government. Now, the office of the State Election Commissioner is autonomous like the Election Commissioner of India. However, the State Election Commissioner is an independent officer and is not linked to nor is this officer under the control of the Election Commission of India. State Finance Commission The State government is also required to appoint a State Finance Commission once in five years. This Commission would examine the financial position of the local governments in the State. It would also review the distribution of revenues between the State and local governments on the one hand and between rural and urban local governments on the other. This innovation ensures that allocation of funds to the rural local governments will not be a political matter. State governments themselves are poor. In the last chapter we read that they ask for money from  the Central government. How can they give money to the local government? Chapter 8: Local Governments Identify some of the powers that your State government has delegated to panchayats. As we mentioned earlier, the 74th amendment dealt with urban local bodies or Nagarpalikas. What is an urban area? It is very easy to identify a big city like Mumbai or Kolkata, but it is not so easy to say this about some very small urban areas that are somewhere between a village and a town. The Census of India defines an urban area as having: (i) a minimum population of 5,000; (ii) at least 75 per cent of male working population engaged in non-agricultural occupations and (iii) a density of population of at least 400 persons per sq. km. As per the 2011 Census, about 31% of India s population lives in urban areas. In many ways the 74th amendment is a repetition of the 73rd amendment, except that it applies to urban areas. All the provisions of the 73rd amendment relating to direct elections, reservations, transfer of subjects, State Election Commission and State Finance Commission are incorporated in the 74th amendment also and thus apply to Nagarpalikas. The Constitution also mandated the transfer of a list of functions from the State government to the urban local bodies. These functions have been listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution. IMPLEMENTATION OF 73 RD AND 74 All States have now passed a legislation to implement the provisions of the 73rd and 74th amendments. During the ten years since these amendments came into force (1994- 2004) most States have had at least two rounds of elections to the local bodies. States like Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and a few others have in fact held three elections so far. Can I hope that these urban local bodies will do something for better housing for the slum dwellers? Or at least provide Indian Constitution at Work Today there are more than 600 Zilla Panchayats, intermediary Panchayats, and 2,40,000 Gram Panchayats in rural India and over 100  city Corporations, 1400 town Municipalities and over 2000 Nagar Panchayats in urban India. More than 32 lakh members are elected to these bodies every five years. Of these, at least 13 lakhs are Assemblies and Parliament put together we have less than 5000 elected representatives. With local bodies, the number of elected representatives has amendments have created uniformity in the structures of across the country. The presence of these local institutions is by itself a significant achievement and would create an atmosphere and platform for people s participation in government. The provision for reservation for women at the Panchayats and Nagarpalikas has ensured the presence of a significant number of women in local bodies. As this reservation is also applicable for the positions of Sarpanch and Adhyaksha, a large number of women elected representatives have come to occupy these positions. There are at least 200 women Adhyakshas in Zilla Panchayats, another 2000 women who are Presidents of the block or taluka panchayats and more than 80,000 women Sarpanchas in Gram Panchayats. This flag is a symbol of the expectations of the people about local governments. People don t want only formal laws. They want genuine implementation of those laws. Write briefly what you think about this slogan   We are the government here in the village! READ AN IMAGE Chapter 8: Local Governments Indian Constitution at Work We also have more than 30 women Mayors in Corporations, over 500 women Adhyakshas of Town Municipalities and nearly 650 Nagar Panchayats headed by women. Women have gained more power and confidence by asserting control over resources.  Their presence in these institutions has given many women a greater understanding of the working of politics. In many cases, they have brought a new perspective and a greater sensitivity to discussions at local bodies. In many cases, women were unable to assert their presence or were mere proxies for the male members of their family who sponsored their election. Such instances, however are becoming fewer. While reservations for Scheduled Castes and Tribes are mandated by the constitutional amendment, most States have also made a provision to reserve seats for Backward Castes. As the Indian population has 16.2 per cent Scheduled Castes and 8.2 per cent Scheduled Tribes, about 6.6 lakh elected members in the urban and local bodies hail from these two communities. This has READ AN IMAGE Look at this photograph. The local Sarkar is sitting out in the sun. Is there any other feature that strikes you? Chapter 8: Local Governments significantly altered the social profile of local bodies. These bodies have thus become more representative of the social reality they operate within.  Sometimes this leads to tensions. The dominant social groups which controlled the village earlier do not wish to give up their power. This leads to intensification of struggle for power. But tension and struggle is not always bad. Whenever there is an attempt to make democracy more meaningful and give power to those who did not enjoy it earlier, there is bound to be some conflict and tension in society. The Constitutional amendments assigned as many as 29 subjects to the local governments. All these subjects are related to functions linked to local welfare and development needs.  The experience with the functioning of local government in the past decade has shown that local governments in India enjoy limited autonomy to perform the functions assigned to them. Many States have not transferred most of the subjects to the local bodies. This means that the local bodies cannot really function in an effective manner. Therefore, the entire exercise of electing so many representatives becomes somewhat symbolic. Some people criticise the formation of the local bodies because this has not changed the way in which decisions are taken at the central and the State level. People at the local level do not enjoy much powers of choosing welfare programmes or allocation of resources. So, the law is good but it is mostly on paper. Is this what they call the gap between theory Bolivia is frequently cited as one of the most successful cases of democratic decentralisation in Latin America.  In 1994, the Popular Participation Law decentralised power to the local level, allowing for the popular election of mayors, dividing the country into municipalities, and crafting a system of automatic fiscal transfers to the new municipalities.  Bolivia is divided into 314 municipal governments. These governments in Bolivia are headed by  popularly-elected mayors (presidente municipal) and a municipal council (cabildo). Local elections occur nationwide every five years. Indian Constitution at Work Local bodies have very little funds of their own. The dependence of local bodies on the State and central governments for financial support has greatly eroded their capacity to operate effectively. While rural local bodies raise 0.24% of the total revenues collected, they account for 4% of the total expenditure made by the government. So they earn much less than they spend. That makes them dependent on those who give them grants. This experience suggests that local governments continue to be agencies implementing the welfare and development schemes of the central and State government. Giving more power to local government means that we should be prepared for real decentralisation of power. Ultimately, democracy means that power should be shared by the people; people in the villages and urban localities must have the power to decide what policies and programmes they want to adopt. As you have studied earlier, democracy means decentralisation of power and giving more and more power to the people. The laws about local governments are an important step in the direction of democratisation. But the true test of democracy is not merely in the legal provisions but in the practice of those provisions. Bolivian local governments have been entrusted with building local health and education facilities, as well as maintenance of this infrastructure. In Bolivia, 20% of nationwide tax collections are distributed among municipalities on a per capita basis. While these municipalities may levy taxes on motor vehicles, urban property, and large agricultural properties, fiscal transfers provide the bulk of the operating budget for these Chapter 8: Local Governments Constitution of India visualised village panchayats as units of self- government. Think over the situation described in the following statements and explain how do these situations strengthen or weaken the panchayats in becoming  units of self-government. Government of a State has allowed a big company to establish a huge steel plant. Many villages would be adversely affected by the steel plant. Gram Sabha of one of the affected villages passed a resolution that before establishing any big industries in the region, village people must be consulted and their grievances should be redressed. The government has decided that 20 % of all its expenditure would be done through the panchayats. A village panchayat kept on demanding funds for a building for village school, the government officials turned down their proposal saying that funds are allocated for certain other schemes and cannot be spent otherwise. The government divided a village Dungarpur into two and made a part of village Jamuna and Sohana. Now village Dungarpur has ceased to exist in government s books. A village panchayat observed that water sources of their region are depleting fast. They decided to mobilise village youth to do some voluntary work and revive the old village ponds and wells. Suppose you are entrusted to evolve a local government plan of a State, what powers would you endow to the village panchayats to function as units of self-government? Mention any five powers and the justification in two lines for each of them for giving those powers. What are the provisions for the reservations for the socially disadvantaged groups as per the 73rd amendment? Explain how these provisions have changed the profile of the leadership at the What were the main differences between the local governments before 73rd amendment and after that amendment? Read the following conversation. Write in two hundred words your opinion about the issues raised in this conversation. Indian Constitution at Work Alok: Our Constitution guarantees equality between men and women. Reservations in local bodies for women  ensure their equal share in power. Neha: But it is not enough that women should be in positions of power. It is necessary that the budget of local bodies should have separate provision for women. Jayesh: I don t like this reservations business. A local body must take care of all people in the village and that would automatically take care of women and their interests. Read the provisions of the 73rd Amendment. Which of the following concerns does this amendment address? Fear of replacement makes representatives accountable to the The dominant castes and feudal landlords dominate the local Rural illiteracy is very high. Illiterate people cannot take decisions about the development of the village. To be effective the village panchayats need resources and powers to make plans for the village development. The following are different justifications given in favour of local government. Give them ranking and explain why you attach greater significance to a particular rationale than the others. According to you, on which of these rationales the decision of the Gram panchayat of Vengaivasal village was based? How? Government can complete the projects with lesser cost with the involvement of the local community. The development plans made by the local people will have greater acceptability than those made by the government officers. People know their area, needs problems and priorities. By collective participation they should discuss and take decisions about their life. It is difficult for the common people to contact their representatives of the State or the national legislature. Which of the following according to you involve decentralisation? Why are other options not sufficient for decentralisation? To hold election of the Gram Panchayat. Decision by the villagers themselves about what policies and programmes are useful for the village. Chapter 8: Local Governments Power to call meeting of Gram Sabha. A Gram Panchayat receiving the report from the Block Development Officer about the progress of a project started by the State government. 9. A student of Delhi University, Raghavendra Parpanna, wanted to study the role of decentralisation in decision making about primary education. He asked some questions to the villagers. These questions are given below. If you were among those villagers, what answer would you give to each of these questions? A meeting of the Gram Sabha is to be called to discuss what steps should be taken to ensure that every child of the village goes to the school. a. How would you decide the suitable day for the meeting? Think who would be able to attend / not attend the meeting because of your choice. (i) A day specified by the BDO or the collector (ii) Day of the village haat (iv) Naag panchami / sankranti b. What is a suitable venue for the meeting? Why? (i) Venue suggested by the circular of the district collector. (ii) Religious place in the village. (iii) Dalit Mohalla. (iv) Upper caste Tola (v) Village school In the Gram Sabha meeting firstly a circular sent by the district collector was read. It suggested what steps should be taken to organise an education rally and what should be its route. The meeting did not discuss about the children who never come to school or about girls  education, or the condition of the school building and the timing of the school. No women teacher attended the meeting as it was held on Sunday. What do you think about these proceedings as an instance of people s participation? Imagine your class as the Gram Sabha. Discuss the agenda of the meeting and suggest some steps to realise the goal. Indian Constitution at Work CONSTITUTION AS A In this chapter, you will see how the Constitution has worked in the last 69 years and how India has managed to be governed by the same Constitution. After studying this chapter you will find out that:   the Indian Constitution can be amended according to the needs of the time;   though many such amendments have already taken place, the Constitution has remained intact and its basic premises have not changed;   the judiciary has played an important role in protecting the Constitution and also in interpreting the Constitution; and   the Constitution is a document that keeps evolving and responding to changing Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document ARE CONSTITUTIONS STATIC? It is not uncommon for nations to rewrite their constitutions in response to changed circumstances or change of ideas within the society or even due to political upheavals. The Soviet Union had four constitutions in its life of 74 years (1918, 1924, 1936 and 1977). In 1991, the rule of the Communist Party of Soviet Union came to an end and soon the Soviet federation disintegrated. After this political upheaval, the newly formed Russian federation adopted a new constitution in But look at India. The Constitution of India was adopted on 26 November 1949. Its implementation formally started from 26 January 1950. More than 69 years after that, the same constitution continues to function as the framework within which the government of our Is it that our Constitution is so good that it needs no change? Was it that our Constitution makers were so farsighted and wise that they had foreseen all the changes that would take place in the future? In some sense both the answers are correct. It is true that we have inherited a very robust Constitution. The basic framework of the Constitution is very much suited to our country. It is also true that the Constitution makers were very farsighted and provided for many solutions for future situations. But no constitution can provide for all eventualities. No document can be such that it needs no change. France had numerous constitutions in the last two centuries. After the revolution and during the Napoleonic period, France experimentation about a constitution: The post- revolution constitution of French republic. Then commenced the second French republic in 1848. The third French republic was formed with a new constitution in 1875. In constitution, the fourth French republic came into being. Finally, in 1958, the fifth French republic came into being with yet It seems to me that constitutional changes are very closely linked to political Indian Constitution at Work Then how does the same Constitution continue to serve the country? One of the answers to such questions is that our Constitution accepts the necessity of modifications according to changing needs of the society. Secondly, in the actual working of the Constitution, there has been enough flexibility of interpretations. Both political practice and judicial rulings have shown maturity and flexibility in implementing the Constitution. These factors have made our Constitution a living document rather than a closed and static rulebook. In any society, those responsible for drafting the constitution at a particular time would face one common challenge: the provisions of the constitution would naturally reflect efforts to tackle the problems that the society is facing at the time of making of the constitution. At the same time, the constitution must be a document that provides the framework of the government for the future as well. Therefore, the constitution has to be able to respond to the challenges that may arise in the future. In this sense, the constitution will always have something that is contemporary and something that has a more At the same time, a constitution is not a frozen and unalterable document. It is a document made by human beings and may need revisions, changes and re- examination. It is true that the constitution reflects the dreams and aspirations of the concerned society. It must also be kept in mind that the constitution is a framework for the democratic governance of the society. In this sense, it is an instrument that societies create for themselves. This dual role of the constitution always leads to difficult questions about the status of the constitution: is it so sacred that nobody ever can change it? Alternatively, is it so ordinary an instrument that it can be modified just like any other ordinary law? The makers of the Indian Constitution were aware of this problem and sought to strike a balance. They placed the Constitution above ordinary law and expected that I know that the Constitution of the US came into existence more than 200 years ago and so far it has been amended only 27 times! Isn t that very interesting? Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document the future generations will respect this document. At the same time, they recognised that in the future, this document may require modifications. Even at the time of writing the Constitution, they were aware that on many matters there were differences of opinion. Whenever society would veer toward any particular opinion, a change in the constitutional provisions would be required. Thus, the Indian Constitution is a combination of both the approaches mentioned above: that the constitution is a sacred document and that it is an instrument that may require changes from time to time.  In other words, our Constitution is not a static document, it is not the final word about everything; it is not unalterable. Check your progress After reading the section above, a number of students in the class were confused. They made the following statements. What would you say about each of these statements? The Constitution is like any other law. It simply tells us what are the rules and regulations governing the government. The  Constitution is the expression of the will of the people, so there must be a provision to change the Constitution after every ten or fifteen years. The  Constitution is a statement of the philosophy of the country. It can never be changed. The  Constitution is a sacred document. Therefore any talk of changing it is against HOW TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION?  Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Indian Constitution at Work We have already seen that the makers of our Constitution wanted to strike a balance. The Constitution must be amended if so required. But it must be protected from unnecessary and frequent changes. In other words, they wanted the Constitution to be  flexible  and at the same time  rigid. Flexible means open to changes and rigid means resistant to changes. A constitution that can be very easily changed or modified is often called flexible. In the case of constitutions, which are very difficult to amend, they are described as rigid. The Indian Constitution combines both these characteristics. The makers of the Constitution were aware of the fact that there may be some faults or mistakes in the Constitution; they knew that the Constitution could not be totally free of errors. Whenever such mistakes would come to light, they wanted the Constitution to be easily amended and to be able to get rid of these mistakes. Then there were some provisions in the Constitution that were of temporary nature and it was decided that these could be altered later on once the new Parliament was elected. But at the same time, the Constitution was framing a federal polity and therefore, the rights and powers of the States could not be changed without the consent of the States. Some other features were so central to the spirit of the Constitution that the Constitution makers were anxious to protect these from change. These provisions had to be made rigid. These considerations led to different ways of amending the Constitution. I don t understand how a constitution can be flexible or rigid. Isn t it the politics of that period which makes the constitution rigid or flexible? How to amend the Similar to ordinary law: simple majority in Parliament: as mentioned in some Special majority in Parliament in both as per article 368 Legislatures of half the states: article Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document There are many articles in the Constitution, which mention that these articles can be amended by a simple law of the Parliament. No special procedure for amendment is required in such cases and there is no difference at all between an amendment and an ordinary law. These parts of the Constitution are very flexible. Read carefully the following text of some articles of the Constitution. In both these articles, the wording  by law  indicates that these articles can be modified by the Parliament without recourse to the procedure laid down in Article 368. Many other articles of the Constitution can be modified by the Parliament in this simple manner. Article 2: Parliament may by law admit into Article 3: Parliament may by law   b) increase the area of any state. For amending the remaining parts of the Constitution, provision has been made in Article 368 of the Constitution. In this article, there are two methods of amending the Constitution and they apply to two different sets of articles of the Constitution. One method is that amendment can be made by special majority of the two houses of the Parliament. The other method is more difficult: it requires special majority of the Parliament and consent of half of the State legislatures. Note that all amendments to the Constitution are initiated only in the Parliament. Besides the special majority in the Parliament no outside agency   like a constitution commission or a separate body is required for amending the Constitution. Similarly, after the passage in the Parliament and in some cases, in State legislatures, no referendum is required for ratification of the amendment. An amendment What happens if some States want an amendment to the Constitution?  Can t they propose an amendment? I think this is another example of favouring the centre against the Indian Constitution at Work bill, like all other bills, goes to the President for his assent, but in this case, the President has no powers to send it back for reconsideration. These details show how rigid and complicated the amending process could have been. Our Constitution avoids these complications. This makes the amendment procedure relatively simple. But more importantly, this process underlines an important principle: only elected representatives of the people are empowered to consider and take final decisions on the question of amendments. Thus, sovereignty of elected representatives (parliamentary sovereignty) is the basis of the amendment procedure. In the chapters on Election, Executive and Judiciary, we have come across provisions that require  special majority. Let us repeat again what special majority means. Ordinarily, all business of the legislature requires that a motion or resolution or bill should get the support of a simple majority of the members voting at that time. Suppose that at the time of voting on a bill, 247 members were present in the house and all of them participated in the voting on the bill. Then, the bill would be passed if at least 124 members voted in favour of the bill. Not so in the case of an amendment bill. Amendment to the Constitution requires two different kinds of special majorities: in the first place, those voting in favour of the amendment bill should constitute at least half of the total strength of that House. Secondly, the supporters of the amendment bill must also constitute two-thirds of those who actually take part in voting. Both Houses of the Parliament must pass the amendment bill separately in this same manner (there is no provision for a joint session). For every amendment bill, this special majority is required. Can you see the significance of this requirement? In the Lok Sabha there are 545 members. Therefore, any amendment must be supported by a minimum of 273 members. Even if only 300 members are present at the time of voting, the amendment bill must get the support of 273 out of them. But imagine that 400 members of Lok Sabha have voted on an amendment bill. How many members should support the bill to get the bill passed? In addition to this, both the Houses must pass the amendment bill (with special majorities) separately. This means that unless there Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document Two principles dominate the various procedures of amending the constitutions in most modern One is the principle of special majority. For instance, the constitutions of U.S., South Africa, Russia, etc. have employed this principle: In the case of  constitution of US, it is two-thirds majority, while in South Africa and Russia, for some amendments, three-fourths majority is The other principle that is popular among many modern constitutions is that of people s participation in the process of amending the constitution. In Switzerland, people can even initiate an amendment. Other examples of countries where people initiate or approve amendment to the constitution are Russia and Italy, among others. I am fed up with this business of special majority. It forces you to make difficult calculations all the time. Is it politics or maths?  If those who are dissatisfied with the Constitution have only to obtain a 2/3 majority and if they cannot obtain even (that)..., their dissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot be deemed to be shared by the general public.  Note that Dr. Ambedkar is talking here not only of parliamentary majority. He refers to  sharing (of the views) by the general public. This indicates that behind the majority there is the principle of public opinion that governs decision- is sufficient consensus over the proposed amendment, it cannot be passed. If the party in power enjoys very thin majority, it can pass legislation of its choice and can get budget approved even if the opposition does not agree. But it would need to take at least some opposition parties into confidence, if it wanted to amend the Constitution. So, the basic principle behind the amending procedure is Dr. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 976, 25 November 1949 Indian Constitution at Work that it should be based on broad support among the political parties Ratification by States For some articles of the Constitution, special majority is not sufficient. When an amendment aims to modify an article related to distribution of powers between the States and the central government, or articles related to representation, it is necessary that the States must be consulted and that they give their consent. We have studied the federal nature of the Constitution. Federalism means that powers of the States must not be at the mercy of the central government. The Constitution has ensured this by providing that legislatures of half the States have to pass the amendment bill before the amendment comes into effect. We can say that for some parts of the Constitution, greater or wider consensus in the polity is expected. This provision also respects the States and gives them participation in the process of amendment. At the same time, care is taken to keep this procedure somewhat flexible even in its more rigid format: consent of only half the States is required and simple majority of the State legislature is sufficient. Thus, the amendment process is not impracticable even after taking into consideration this more stringent condition. We may summarise that the Constitution of India can be amended through large-scale consensus and limited participation of the States. The founding fathers took care that Constitution would not be open to easy tampering. And yet, future generations were given the right to amend and modify according to the needs and requirements of Check your progress For making the following amendments to the Constitution of India, what conditions need to be fulfilled?  Place a tick mark in the chart Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document On 26 January 2024, the Constitution of India completed 74 years of its existence. In these years, it has been amended 106 times. Given the relatively difficult method of amending the Constitution, the number of amendments appears quite high. Let us try to find out how it is that so many amendments took place and what it means. Let us first look at the brief history of the amendments: look carefully at the graphs below. The same information is presented in two different ways. The first graph depicts the number of constitution amendments made every ten years; the bar indicates the number of amendments in that period. The second graph depicts the time taken for every ten amendments; the bar depicts the years taken for ten amendments. You will notice that the two decades from 1970 to 1990 saw a large number of amendments. On the other hand, the second graph tells one more story: ten amendments took place between a short span of three Why was our Constitution amended so many times? Is there something wrong with our society or with the Constitution? Subject of amendment Right to freedom Changes in the Changes in State Indian Constitution at Work years between 1974 and 1976. And again, in just three years, from 2001 to 2003, ten amendments took place. In the political history of our country, these two periods are remarkably different. The first was a period of Congress domination. Congress party had a vast majority in Parliament ( it had  352 seats in the Lok Sabha and a majority in most State Assemblies). On the other hand, the period between 2001 and 2003 was a period marked by coalition politics. It was also a period when different parties were in power in different States. The bitter rivalry between the BJP and its opponents is another feature of this period. And yet, this period saw as many as ten amendments in just three years. So, the incidence of amendments is not dependent merely on the nature of majority of the ruling party alone. Years taken for every ten Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document There is always a criticism about the number of amendments. It is said that there have been far too many amendments to the Constitution of India. On the face of it, the fact that 106 amendments took place in 74 years does seem to be somewhat odd. But the two graphs above suggest that amendments are not only due to political considerations. Barring the first decade after the commencement of the Constitution, every decade has witnessed a steady stream of amendments. This means that irrespective of the nature of politics and the party in power, amendments were required to be made from time to time. Was this because of the inadequacies of the original Constitution? Is the Constitution too flexible? Contents of A Amendments made so far mendments made so far mendments made so far mendments made so far mendments made so far Amendments made so far may be classified in three groups. In the first group there are amendments, which are of a technical or administrative nature and were only clarifications, explanations, and minor modifications etc. of the original provisions. They are amendments only in the legal sense, but in matter of fact, they made no substantial difference to the provisions. This is true of the amendment that increased the age of retirement of High Court judges from 60 to 62 years (15th amendment). Similarly, salaries of judges of High Courts and the Supreme Court were increased by an amendment (54th amendment). We may also take the example of the provision regarding reserved seats in the legislatures for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The original provision said that these reservations were for a period of ten years. However, in order to ensure fair representation of these sections, it was necessary to extend this period by ten years. Thus, after every ten years an amendment is made to extend the period by another ten years. This has led to six amendments so far. But these amendments have not made any difference to the original provision. In this sense, it is only a technical amendment. Yes, I think we should be looking at the changes rather than the number of amendments. That is what we should be doing as students of politics. Indian Constitution at Work Do you remember the discussion in chapter four about the role of the President? In the original Constitution, it was assumed that in our parliamentary government, the President would normally abide by the advice of the Council of Ministers. This was only reiterated by a later amendment when Article 74 (1) was amended to clarify that the advice of the Council of Ministers will be binding on the President (President shall act in accordance with the advice of the Council of Ministers). In reality, this amendment did not make any difference because, that is exactly what has been happening all through. The amendment was only by way of explanation. A number of amendments are a product of different interpretations of the Constitution given by the judiciary and the government of the day. When these clashed, the Parliament had to insert an amendment underlining one particular interpretation as the authentic one. It is part of the democratic politics that various institutions would interpret the Constitution and particularly the scope of their own powers in a different manner. Many times, the Parliament did not agree with the judicial interpretation and therefore, sought to amend the Constitution to overcome the ruling of the judiciary. In the period between 1970 and 1975 this situation arose frequently. In the chapter on the Judiciary, you have already studied the issues of difference between the Judiciary and the Parliament: one was the relationship between fundamental rights and directive principles, the other was the scope of right to private property and the third was the scope of Parliament s power to amend the Constitution. In the period 1970-1975, the Parliament repeatedly made amendments to overcome the adverse interpretations by It may be kept in mind that during this period (1970- 75) many political events were unfolding and thus this history of our constitutional development can be fully I am still confused. If there is a written constitution, where is the scope for different interpretations? Or do people read in the constitution what they want to be there? Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document understood only in the context of the politics of that period. You will know more about these issues in the next year when you study the political history of independent India. Amendments through Political Consensus Thirdly, there is another large group of amendments that have been made as a result of the consensus among the political parties. We may say that this consensus made it necessary that some changes had to be made in order to reflect the prevailing political philosophy and aspirations of the society. In fact, many of the amendments of the post-1984 period are instances of this trend. Remember our question above about the peculiarity that even when there were coalition governments, this period saw so many amendments?  The reason is because many of these amendments were based on an evolving consensus on certain issues. Starting with the anti-defection amendment (52nd amendment), this period saw a series of amendments in spite of the political turbulence. Apart from the anti-defection amendments (52nd and 91st), these amendments include the 61st amendment bringing down the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18 years, the 73rd and the 74th amendments, etc. In this same period, there were some amendments clarifying and expanding the scope of reservations in jobs and admissions. After 1992-93, an overall consensus emerged in the country about these measures and therefore, amendments regarding these measures were passed without much difficulty (77 th, 81st, and 82nd Our discussion so far, should not create an impression that there has never been any controversy over amending the Constitution. In fact, amendments during the period 1970 to 1980 generated a lot of legal and political controversy.  The parties that were in opposition during the period 1971-1976, saw many of these amendments So, politicians do agree on some matters! And yet they fight over the meaning of what they agreed on! Indian Constitution at Work as attempts by the ruling party to subvert the Constitution. In particular, the 38th, 39th and 42nd amendments have been the most controversial amendments so far. These three amendments were made in the background of internal emergency declared in the country from June 1975. They sought to make basic changes in many crucial parts of the Constitution. The 42nd amendment was particularly seen as a wide- ranging amendment affecting large parts of the Constitution. It was also an attempt to override the ruling of the Supreme Court given in the Kesavananda case. Even the duration of the Lok Sabha was extended from five to six years. In the chapter on Rights, you have read about Fundamental Duties. They were included in the Constitution by this amendment act. The 42nd amendment also put restrictions on the review powers of the Judiciary. It was said at that time that this amendment was practically a rewriting of many parts of the original Constitution. Do you know that this amendment made changes to the Preamble, to the seventh schedule of the Constitution and to 53 articles of the Constitution? Many MPs belonging to the opposition parties were in jail when this amendment was passed in Parliament. In this backdrop, elections were held in 1977 and the ruling party (Congress) was defeated. The new government thought it necessary to reconsider these controversial amendments and through the 43rd and 44th amendments, cancelled most of the changes that were effected by the 38th, 39th and the 42nd amendments. The constitutional balance was restored by these amendments. Find out the amendments about the right to education (RTE) and the Goods and Services Tax (GST). What do you think is the importance of So, it is all about politics! Didn t I say that this entire thing about constitutions and amendments is linked to politics rather than law? Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document BASIC STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF THE One thing that has had a long lasting effect on the evolution of the Indian Constitution is the theory of the basic structure of the Constitution. You know already that the Judiciary advanced this theory in the famous case of Kesavananda Bharati. This ruling has contributed to the evolution of the Constitution in the following ways: It has set specific limits to Parliament s power to amend the Constitution. It says that no amendment can violate the basic structure of the Constitution; It allows Parliament to amend any and all parts of the Constitution (within this limitation); and It places the Judiciary as the final authority in deciding if an amendment violates basic structure and what constitutes the basic structure. The Supreme Court gave the Kesavananda ruling in 1973. In the past four decades, this decision has governed all interpretations of the Constitution and all institutions in the country have accepted the theory of basic structure. In fact, the theory of basic structure is itself an example of a living constitution. There is no mention of this theory in the Constitution. It has emerged from judicial interpretation. Thus, the Judiciary and its interpretation have practically amended the Constitution without a All living documents evolve in this manner through debates, arguments, competition and practical politics. Since 1973, the Court has, in many cases, elaborated upon this theory of basic structure and given instances of what constitutes the basic structure of the Constitution of India. In a sense, the basic structure doctrine has further consolidated the balance between rigidity and flexibility: by saying that certain parts cannot be amended, it has underlined the rigid nature while by allowing amendments to all others it has underlined the flexible nature of the amending process. Ah! So it is the judiciary that has the final word! Is this also judicial activism? Indian Constitution at Work There are many other examples of how judicial interpretation changed our understanding of the Constitution. In many decisions the Supreme Court had held that reservations in jobs and educational institutions cannot exceed fifty per cent of the total seats. This has now become an accepted principle. Similarly, in the case involving reservations for other backward classes, the Supreme Court introduced the idea of creamy layer and ruled that persons belonging to this category were not entitled to benefits under reservations. In the same manner, the Judiciary has contributed to an informal amendment by interpreting various provisions concerning right to education, right to life and liberty and the right to form and manage minority educational institutions. These are instances of how rulings by the Court contribute to the evolution of the Constitution. Review of the Constitution In the late nineties, efforts were made to review the entire Constitution. In the year 2000 a commission to review the working of the Constitution was appointed by the Government of India under the chairmanship of a retired Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice Venkatachaliah. Opposition parties and many other organisations boycotted the commission. While a lot of political controversy surrounded this commission, the commission stuck to the theory of basic structure and did not suggest any measures that would endanger the basic structure of the Constitution. This shows the significance of the basic structure doctrine in our constitutional practice. It s all wrong. First they say that an amendment requires consensus and now we see that Judges change the whole meaning of the Constitution. Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document CONSTITUTION AS A LIVING DOCUMENT We have described our Constitution as a living document. What does Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to the situations and circumstances arising from time to time. Like a living being, the Constitution responds to experience. In fact that is the answer to the riddle we mentioned at the beginning about the durability of the Constitution. Even after so many changes in the society, the Constitution continues to work effectively because of this ability to be dynamic, to be open to interpretations and the ability to respond to the changing situation. This is a hallmark of a democratic constitution. In a democracy, practices and ideas keep evolving over time and the society engages in experiments according to these. A constitution, which protects democracy and yet allows for evolution of new practices becomes not only durable but also the object of respect from the citizens. The important point is: has the Constitution been able to protect itself and protect democracy? In the past six decades, some very critical situations arose in the politics and constitutional development of the country. We have made a brief reference to some of these in this chapter already. In terms of constitutional-legal issues, the most serious question that came up Check your progress State whether the following statements are correct After the Basic Structure ruling, Parliament does not have power to amend the Constitution. The Supreme Court has given a clear list of the basic features of our Constitution, which cannot Judiciary has the power to decide whether an amendment violates basic structure or not. The Kesavananda Bharati ruling has set clear limits on Parliament s power to amend the Indian Constitution at Work again and again from 1950 was about the supremacy of the Parliament. In a parliamentary democracy, the Parliament represents the people and therefore, it is expected to have an upper hand over both Executive and Judiciary. At the same time, there is the text of the Constitution and it has given powers to other organs of the government. Therefore, the supremacy of the Parliament has to operate within this framework. Democracy is not only about votes and people s representation. It is also about the principle of rule of law. Democracy is also about developing institutions and working through these institutions. All the political institutions must be responsible to the people and maintain a balance with each other. Contribution of the Judiciary During the controversy between the Judiciary and the Parliament, the Parliament thought that it had the power and responsibility to make laws (and amendments) for furthering the interests of the poor, backward and the needy. The Judiciary insisted that all this has to take place within the framework provided by the Constitution and pro-people measures should not bypass legal procedures, because, once you bypass laws even with good intentions, that can give an excuse to the power holders to use their power arbitrarily. And democracy is as much about checks on arbitrary use of power as it is about the well-being of the people. The success of the working of the Indian Constitution lies in resolving these tensions. The Judiciary, in its famous Kesavananda ruling found a way out of the existing complications by turning to the spirit of the Constitution rather than its letter. If you read the Constitution, you will not find any mention of the  basic structure  of the Constitution. Nowhere does the Constitution say that such and such are part of the basic structure. In this sense, the  basic structure  theory is the I get it! It s like a see-saw. Or is it a game of tug of war? Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document invention of the Judiciary. How did it invent such a non- existent thing? And how is it that all other institutions have accepted this during the past four decades? Therein lies the distinction between letter and spirit. The Court came to the conclusion that in reading a text or document, we must respect the intent behind that document. A mere text of the law is less important than the social circumstances and aspirations that have produced that law or document. The Court was looking at the basic structure as something without which the Constitution cannot be imagined at all. This is an instance of trying to balance the letter and the spirit of the Maturity of the Political Leadership Our discussion of the role of Judiciary, in the paragraph above, brings out one more fact. In the background of the fierce controversy that raged between 1967 and 1973, Parliament and the Executive also realised that a balanced and long term view was necessary. After the Supreme Court gave the ruling in the Kesavananda case some attempts were made to ask the Court to reconsider its ruling. When these failed, the 42nd amendment was made and parliamentary supremacy was asserted. But the Court again repeated its earlier stand in the Minerva Mills case (1980). Therefore, even four decades after the ruling in the Kesavananda case, this ruling has dominated our interpretation of the Constitution. Political parties, political leaders, the government, and Parliament, accepted the idea of inviolable basic structure. Even when there was talk about  review  of the Constitution, that exercise could not cross the limits set by the theory of the basic structure. When the Constitution was made, leaders and people of our country shared a common vision of India. In Nehru s famous speech at the time of independence, this vision was described as a tryst with destiny. In the Constituent Assembly also, all the leaders mentioned this vision: dignity and freedom of the individual, social and Let us not ignore that there are many instances of political immaturity as well. Does one have to list these? Of course, if there are no rights and no elections, the Constitution won t make much sense. And if there is no well being, elections and rights won t make sense. Is this how we understand the  spirit  of Indian Constitution at Work economic equality, well-being of all people, unity based on national integrity. This vision has not disappeared. People and leaders alike hold to the vision and hope to realize it. Therefore, the Constitution, based on this vision, has remained an object of respect and authority even after half a century. The basic values governing our public imagination remain intact. There can still be debates about what constitutes basic structure. There is nothing wrong in such debates.  We must remember that politics in a democracy is necessarily full of debates and differences. That is a sign of diversity, liveliness and openness. Democracy welcomes debates. At the same time, our political parties and leadership have shown maturity in setting limits to these debates. Because, politics is also about compromises and give-and-take. Extreme positions may be theoretically very correct and ideologically very attractive, but politics demands that everyone is prepared to moderate their extreme views, sharp positions and reach a common minimum ground. Only then democratic politics becomes possible. Politicians and the people of India have understood and practised these skills. That has made the experience of working of the democratic Constitution quite successful. Among the different organs of the government, there will always be competition over which one is more important than the others. They will also always fight over what constitutes Even within the Constituent Assembly, there were some members who felt that this Constitution was not suited to the Indian situation:  The ideals on which this draft constitution is framed have no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India.  this Constitution  would not prove suitable and would break down soon after being brought into operation.  Lakshminarayan Sahu, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 613, 17 November 1949 Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document the welfare of the people. But in the last instance, the final authority lies with the people. People, their freedoms and their well-being constitute the purpose of democracy and also the outcome of democratic politics. Choose the correct statement from the following. A constitution needs to be amended from time to time because, Circumstances change and require suitable changes in the A document written at one point of time becomes outdated after Every generation should have a constitution of its own liking. It must reflect the philosophy of the existing government. Write True / False against the following statements. The President cannot send back an amendment bill for reconsideration of Parliament. Elected representatives alone have the power to amend the The Judiciary cannot initiate the process of constitutional amendment but can effectively change the Constitution by interpreting it differently. Parliament can amend any section of the Constitution. Which of the following are involved in the amendment of the Indian Constitution? In what way are they involved? President of India Indian Constitution at Work You have read in this chapter that the 42nd amendment was one of the most controversial amendments so far. Which of the following were the reasons for this controversy? It was made during national emergency, and the declaration of that emergency was itself controversial. It was made without the support of special majority. It was made without ratification by State legislatures. It contained provisions, which were controversial. Which of the following is not a reasonable explanation of the conflict between the legislature and the judiciary over different Different interpretations of the Constitution are possible. In a democracy, debates and differences are natural. Constitution has given higher importance to certain rules and principles and also allowed for amendment by special majority. Legislature cannot be entrusted to protect the rights of the Judiciary can only decide the constitutionality of a particular law; cannot resolve political debates about its need. Identify the correct statements about the theory of basic structure. Correct the incorrect statements. Constitution specifies the basic tenets. Legislature can amend all parts of the Constitution except the Judiciary has defined which aspects of the Constitution can be termed as the basic structure and which cannot. This theory found its first expression in the Kesavananda Bharati case and has been discussed in subsequent judgments. This theory has increased the powers of the judiciary and has come to be accepted by different political parties and the From the information that many amendments were made during 2000-2003, which of the following conclusions would you draw? Judiciary did not interfere in the amendments made during One political party had a strong majority during this period. There was strong pressure from the pubic in favour of certain Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document There were no real differences among the parties during this The amendments were of a non-controversial nature and parties had an agreement on the subject of amendments. 8. Explain the reason for requiring special majority for amending the 9. Many amendments to the Constitution of India have been made due to different interpretations upheld by the Judiciary and Parliament. Explain with examples. 10. If amending power is with the elected representatives, judiciary should NOT have the power to decide the validity of amendments. Do you agree? Give your reasons in 100 words. Indian Constitution at Work THE PHILOSOPHY OF In this book, so far we have studied some important provisions of our Constitution and the way in which these have worked in the last 69 years. We also studied the way in which the Constitution was made. But have you ever asked yourself why leaders of the national movement felt the need to adopt a constitution after achieving independence from British rule? Why did they choose to bind themselves and the future generations to a constitution? In this book, you have repeatedly visited the debates in the Constituent Assembly. But it should be asked why the study of the constitution must be accompanied by a deep examination of the debates in the Constituent Assembly?  This question will be addressed in this chapter. Secondly, it is important to ask what kind of a constitution we have given ourselves. What objectives did we hope to achieve by it? Do these objectives have a moral content? If so, what precisely is it? What are the strengths and limitations of this vision and, by implication, the achievements and weaknesses of the Constitution? In doing so, we try to understand what can be called the philosophy of the Constitution. After reading this chapter, you should be able to understand:   why it is important to study the philosophy of the Constitution;   what are the core features of the Indian Constitution;   what are the criticisms of this Constitution; and   what are the limitations of the Constitution? Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution WHAT IS MEANT BY PHILOSOPHY OF THE Some people believe that a constitution merely consists of laws and that laws are one thing, values and morality, quite another. Therefore, we can have only a legalistic, not a political philosophy approach to the Constitution.  It is true that all laws do not have a moral content, but many laws are closely connected to our deeply held values. For example, a law might prohibit discrimination of persons on grounds of language or religion. Such a law is connected to the idea of equality. Such a law exists because we value equality. Therefore, there is a connection between laws and moral values. We must therefore, look upon the constitution as a document that is based on a certain moral vision. We need to adopt a political philosophy approach to the constitution. What do we mean by a political philosophy approach to the constitution? We have three things in First, we need to understand the conceptual structure of the constitution. What does this mean? It means that we must ask questions like what are the possible meanings of terms used in the constitution such as  rights,  citizenship,  minority  or  democracy ? Furthermore, we must attempt to work out a coherent vision of society and polity conditional upon an interpretation of the key concepts of the constitution. We must have a better grasp of the set of ideals embedded in the constitution. Our final point is that the Indian Constitution must be read in conjunction with the Constituent Assembly Debates in order to refine and raise to a higher theoretical plane, the justification of values embedded in the Constitution.  A philosophical treatment of a value is incomplete if a detailed justification for it is not provided.  When the framers of the Constitution Does it mean that all philosophy? Or is it that only some constitutions have a Indian Constitution at Work chose to guide Indian society and polity by a set of values, there must have been a corresponding set of reasons. Many of them, though, may not have been fully explained. A political philosophy approach to the constitution is needed not only to find out the moral content expressed in it and to evaluate its claims but possibly to use it to interpretations of the many core values in our polity. It is obvious that many of its ideals are challenged, discussed, debated and contested in different political arenas, in the legislatures, in party forums, in the press, in schools and ideals are variously manipulated to suit partisan short term interests. We must, whether or not a exists between the and its expression in other arenas. Sometimes, the same ideal is interpreted differently by different institutions. We need to compare these differing interpretations. Since the expression The Japanese Constitution of 1947 is popularly known as the  peace constitution. The preamble states that  We, the Japanese people desire peace for all time and are deeply conscious of the high ideals controlling human relationship. The philosophy of the Japanese constitution is thus based on the ideal of peace. 1) Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling 2) In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be This shows how the context of making the constitution dominates the thinking of the constitution Yes, of course, I do remember this issue of different Constitution. We discussed it in the last chapter, didn t we? Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution of the ideal in the constitution has considerable authority it must be used to arbitrate in conflict of interpretation over values or ideals. Our Constitution can perform this job of Constitution as Means of Democratic Transformation In the first chapter we have studied the meaning of the term constitution and the need to have a constitution. It is widely agreed that one reason for having constitutions is the need to restrict the exercise of power.  Modern states are excessively powerful. They are believed to have a monopoly over force and coercion. What if institutions of such states fall into wrong hands who abuse this power? Even if these institutions were created for our safety and well-being, they can easily turn against us. Experience of state power the world over shows that most states are prone to harming the interests of at least some individuals and groups. If so, we need to draw the rules of the game in such a way that this tendency of states is continuously checked. Constitutions provide these basic rules and therefore, prevent states from turning tyrannical. Constitutions also provide peaceful, democratic means to bring about social transformation. Moreover, for a hitherto colonised people, constitutions announce and embody the first real exercise of political self-determination. Nehru understood both these points well. The demand for a Constituent Assembly, he claimed, represented a collective demand for full self-determination because; only a Constituent Assembly of elected representatives of the Indian people had the right to frame India s constitution without external interference. Second, he argued, the Constituent Assembly is not just a body of people or a gathering of able lawyers. Rather, it is a  nation on the move, throwing away the shell of its past political and possibly social structure, and fashioning for itself a new garment of its own making.  The Indian Constitution was designed to break the shackles of traditional social hierarchies and to usher in a new era of freedom, equality and justice. So, can we say that members of the Constituent Assembly were all eager to bring social transformation? But we also keep saying that all view points were represented in the Indian Constitution at Work This approach had the potential of changing the theory of constitutional democracy altogether: according to this approach, constitutions exist not only to limit people in power but to empower those who traditionally have been deprived of it. Constitutions can give vulnerable people the power to achieve collective good. Why do we need to go back to the Constituent Assembly? Why look backwards and bind ourselves to the past? That may be the job of a legal historian   to go into the past and search for the basis of legal and political ideas. But why should students of politics be interested in studying the intentions and concerns of those who framed the Constitution? Why not take account of changed circumstances and define anew the normative function of the In the context of America   where the constitution was written in the late 18th century  it is absurd to apply the values and standards of that era to the 21st century.  However, in India, the world of the original framers and our present day world may not have changed so drastically.  In terms of our values, ideals and conception, we have not separated ourselves from the world of the Constituent Assembly.  A history of our Constitution is still very much a history of the present. Read again the quotes from the Debates of the Constituent Assembly (CAD) given in the following chapters. Do you think that the arguments in those quotations have relevance for our present times? Why? Quotes in Chapter two Quote in Chapter seven Furthermore, we may have forgotten the real point underlying several of our legal and political practices, simply because somewhere down the road we began to take them for granted.  These reasons have now slipped into the background, screened off from our consciousness even though they still provide the organizational principle to current practices. When the going is good, this forgetting Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution is harmless. But when these practices are challenged or threatened, neglect of the underlying principles can be harmful.  In short, to get a handle on current constitutional practice, to grasp their value and meaning, we may have no option but to go back in time to the Constituent Assembly debates and perhaps even further back in time to the colonial era.  Therefore, we need to remember and keep revisiting the political philosophy underlying our WHAT IS THE POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY OF OUR It is hard to describe this philosophy in one word. It resists any single label because it is liberal, democratic, egalitarian, secular, and federal, open to community values, sensitive to the needs of religious and linguistic minorities as well as historically disadvantaged groups, and committed to building a common national identity. While all ideas unfold on this playfield, democracy is the  Umpire. READ A CARTOON This is tough. Why couldn t they plainly tell us what the philosophy of this Constitution is? How can ordinary citizens understand the philosophy if it is hidden like this? Shankar. Copyright: Children s Book Trust. 26 January 1950 Indian Constitution at Work In short, it is committed to freedom, equality, social justice, and some form of national unity. But underneath all this, there is a clear emphasis on peaceful and democratic measures for putting this philosophy into practice. The first point to note about the Constitution is its commitment to individual freedom. This commitment did not emerge miraculously out of calm deliberations around a table. Rather, it was the product of continuous intellectual and political activity of well over a century. As early as the beginning of the nineteenth century, Rammohan Roy protested against curtailment of the freedom of the press by the British colonial state. Roy argued that a state responsive to the needs of individuals must provide them the means by which their needs are communicated. Therefore, the state must permit unlimited liberty of publication. Likewise, Indians continued to demand a free press throughout the British rule. It is not surprising therefore that freedom of expression is an integral part of the Indian Constitution.  So is the freedom from arbitrary arrest. After all, the infamous Rowlatt Act, which the national movement opposed so vehemently, sought to deny this basic freedom. These and other individual freedoms such as freedom of conscience are part of the liberal ideology. On this basis, we can say that the Indian Constitution has a pretty strong liberal character. In the chapter on fundamental rights we have already seen how the Constitution values individual freedom. It might be recalled that for over forty years before the adoption of the Constitution, every single resolution, scheme, bill and report of the Indian National Congress mentioned individual rights, not just in passing but as a non- When we say that the Indian Constitution is liberal, we do not mean that it is liberal only in the classical western sense. In the book on Political Theory, you will learn more about the idea of liberalism. Classical liberalism always privileges rights of the individuals over demands of social justice and community values. Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution The liberalism of the Indian Constitution differs from this version in two ways. First, it was always linked to social justice. The best example of this is the provision for reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Constitution. The makers of the Constitution believed that the mere granting of the right to equality was not enough to overcome age-old injustices suffered by these groups or to give real meaning to their right to vote. Special constitutional measures were required to advance their interests. Therefore the constitution makers provided a number of special measures to protect the interests of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes such as the reservation of seats in legislatures. The Constitution also made it possible for the government to reserve public sector jobs for these groups. Check your progress State which of the following rights are part of Freedom of expression Freedom of religion Cultural and educational rights of minorities Equal access to public places And while talking of social justice, let us not forget the Indian liberalism has two streams. The first stream began with Rammohan Roy. particularly the rights of women. The second stream included thinkers like K.C. Vivekananda. They introduced the spirit of social justice within orthodox Hinduism. For Vivekananda, such a reordering of Hindu society could not have been possible without liberal principles.   K.M. Panikkar, In Defence of Liberalism, Bombay, Asia Publishing House, 1962. Indian Constitution at Work Respect for diversity and minority rights The Indian Constitution encourages equal respect between communities. This was not easy in our country, first because communities do not always have a relationship of equality; they tend to have hierarchical relationships with one another (as in the case of caste). Second, when these communities do see each other as equals, they also tend to become rivals (as in the case of religious communities).  This was a huge challenge for the makers of the Constitution: how to make communities liberal in their approach and foster a sense of equal respect among them under existing conditions of hierarchy or intense It would have been very easy to resolve this problem by not recognising communities at all, as most western liberal constitutions do. But this would have been unworkable and undesirable in our country. This is not because Indians are attached to communities more than others. Individuals everywhere also belong to cultural communities and every such community has its own values, traditions, customs and language shared by its members. For example, individuals in France or Germany belong to a linguistic community and are deeply attached to it. What makes us different is that we have more openly acknowledged the value of communities. More importantly, India is a land of multiple cultural communities. Unlike Germany or France we have several linguistic and religious communities. It was important to ensure that no one community systematically dominates others. This made it mandatory for our Constitution to recognise community based rights. One such right is the right of religious communities to establish and run their own educational institutions. Such institutions may receive money from the government. This provision shows that the Indian Constitution does not see religion merely as a  private  matter concerning the individual. I have always wondered who I am. I have so many  identities  in my bag: I have my religious identity, I have my linguistic identity, I have ties with my parental town, and  of course, I am a student also. Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution Secular states are widely seen as treating religion as only a private matter. That is to say, they refuse to give religion public or official recognition. Does this mean that the Indian Constitution is not secular? This does not follow. Though the term  secular  was not initially mentioned, the Indian Constitution has always been secular. The mainstream, western conception, of secularism means mutual exclusion of state and religion in order to protect values such as individual freedom and citizenship rights Again, this is something that you will learn more about in Political Theory. The term  mutual exclusion  means this: both religion and state must stay away from the internal affairs of one another. The state must not intervene in the domain of religion; religion likewise should not dictate state policy or influence the conduct of the state. In other words, mutual exclusion means that religion and state must be What is the purpose behind strict separation? It is to safeguard the freedom of individuals. States which lend support to organised religions make them more powerful than they already are. When religious organisations begin to control the religious lives of individuals, when they start dictating how they should relate to God or how they should pray, individuals may have the option of turning to the modern state for protecting their religious freedom, but what help would a state offer them if it has already joined hands with these organisations? To protect religious freedom of individuals, therefore, state must not help religious organisations. But at the same time, state should not tell religious organisations how to manage their affairs. That too can thwart religious freedom. The state must, therefore, not hinder religious organisations either. In short, states should neither help nor hinder religions. Instead, they should keep themselves at an arm s length from them. This has been the prevalent western conception of secularism. Have they started teaching us the Political Theory Indian Constitution at Work Conditions in India were different and to respond to the challenge they posed, the makers of the Constitution had to work out an alternative conception of secularism. They departed from the western model in two ways and for two Rights of Religious Groups First, as mentioned already, they recognised that inter- community equality was as necessary as equality between individuals. This was because a person s freedom and sense of self-respect was directly dependent upon the status of her community. If one community was dominated by another, then its members would also be significantly less free. If, on the other hand, their relations were equal, marked by an absence of domination, then its members would also walk about with dignity, self-respect and freedom. Thus, the Indian Constitution grants rights to all religious communities such as the right to establish and maintain their educational institutions. Freedom of religion in India means the freedom of religion of both individuals and communities. State s Power of Intervention Second, separation in India could not mean mutual exclusion. Why is it so? Because, religiously sanctioned customs such as untouchability deprived individuals of the most basic dignity and self-respect. Such customs were so deeply rooted and pervasive that without active state intervention, there was no hope of their dissolution. The state simply had to interfere in the affairs of religion. Such intervention was not always negative. The state could also help religious communities by giving aid to educational institutions run by them.  Thus, the state may help or hinder religious communities depending on which mode of action promotes values such as freedom and equality. In India separation between religion and state did not mean their mutual exclusion but rather I would like to know whether finally, the state can regulate matters related to religion or not. Otherwise, there can be no Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution principled distance, a rather complex idea that allows the state to be distant from all religions so that it can intervene or abstain from interference, depending upon which of these two would better promote liberty, equality and social justice. We have hitherto mentioned three core features   these can also be seen as the achievements   of our Constitution. First, our Constitution reinforces and reinvents forms of liberal individualism. This is an important achievement because this is done in the backdrop of a society where community values are often indifferent or hostile to individual autonomy. Second, our Constitution upholds the principle of social justice without compromising on individual liberties. The constitutional commitment to caste-based affirmative action programme shows how much ahead India was compared to other nations.  Can one forget that affirmative action programmes in the U.S. were begun after the 1964 Civil Rights Act, almost two decades after they were constitutionally entrenched in India? Third, against the background of inter-communal strife, the Constitution upholds its commitment to group rights (the right to the expression of cultural particularity). This indicates that the framers of the Constitution were more than willing to face the challenges of what more than four decades later has come to be known as multiculturalism. Two other core features may also be regarded as achievements. First, it is no mean achievement to commit oneself to universal franchise, specially when there is widespread belief that traditional hierarchies in India are congealed and more or less impossible to eliminate, and when the right to vote has only recently been extended to women and to the working class in stable, Western democracies. Once the idea of a nation took root among the elite, the idea of democratic self-government followed. Thus, Indian nationalism always conceived of a political order based on the will of every single member of society. The idea of universal franchise lay securely within the heart of nationalism. As early as the Constitution of India Bill (1895), the first non-official attempt at drafting a constitution for India, the author declared that every citizen, i.e., anyone born in Indian Constitution at Work India, had a right to take part in the affairs of the country and be admitted to public office. The Motilal Nehru Report (1928) reaffirms this conception of citizenship, reiterating that every person of either sex who has attained the age of twenty-one is entitled to vote for the House of Representatives or Parliament. Thus from very early on, universal franchise was considered as the most important and legitimate instrument by which the will of the nation was to be properly expressed. Second, by introducing the article concerning North-East (Art. 371), the Indian Constitution anticipates the very important concept of asymmetric federalism. We have seen in the chapter on federalism that the Constitution has created a strong central government. But despite this unitary bias of the Indian Constitution, there are important constitutionally embedded differences between the legal status and prerogatives of different sub-units within the same federation.  Unlike the constitutional symmetry of American federalism, Indian federalism has been constitutionally asymmetric. To meet the specific  The Assembly has adopted the principle of adult franchise with an abundant faith in the common man and the ultimate success of democratic rule and in the full belief that the introduction of democratic government on the basis of adult suffrage will  promote the well-being...  It s certainly a matter of pride that the principle of  one man one vote  was accepted almost uncontested. Isn t it true that women had to struggle for their right to vote in many other Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 835, 23 November 1949 Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution needs and requirements of some sub-units, it was always part of the original design to have a unique relationship with them or to give them special status. Under Article 371A, the privilege of special status was also accorded to the North-Eastern State of Nagaland. This Article not only confers validity on pre-existing laws within Nagaland, but also protects local identity through restrictions on immigration. Many other States too, are beneficiaries of such special provisions. According to the Indian Constitution, then, there is nothing bad about this Although the Constitution did not originally envisage this, India is now a multi-lingual federation. Each major linguistic group is politically recognised and all are treated as equals.  Thus, the democratic and linguistic federalism of India has managed to combine claims to unity with claims to cultural recognition. A fairly robust political arena exists that allows for the play of multiple identities that complement one another. Thus, the Constitution constantly reinforces a common national identity. In the chapter on federalism, you have studied how India strives to retain regional identities along with the national identity. It is clear from what is mentioned above that this common national identity was not incompatible with distinct religious or linguistic identities. The Indian Constitution tried to balance these various identities. Yet, preference was given to common identity under certain conditions. This is clarified in the debate over separate electorates based on religious identity which the Constitution rejects. Separate electorates were rejected not because they fostered difference between religious communities as such or because they endangered a simple notion of national unity but because I am really impressed! Who says our Constitution is based on imitation?. In every  borrowed  aspect, we have put our own Indian Constitution at Work they endangered a healthy national life. Rather than forced unity, our Constitution sought to evolve true fraternity, a goal dear to the heart of Dr. Ambedkar. As Sardar Patel put it, the main objective was to evolve  one community. All these five core features are what might be called the substantive achievements of the Constitution.  However, there were also some First, the Indian Constitution reflects a faith in political deliberation. We know that many groups and interests were not adequately represented in the Constituent Assembly. But the debates in the Assembly amply show that the makers of the Constitution wanted to be as inclusive in their approach as possible. This open-ended approach indicates the willingness of people to modify their existing preferences, in short, to justify outcomes by reference not to self-interest but to reasons.  It also shows a willingness to recognise creative value in difference and Second, it reflects a spirit of compromise and accommodation. These words, compromise and accommodation, should not always be seen with disapproval. Not all compromises are bad.  But in the long run, it would be in the interest of all to forget that there is anything like majority or minority in this country and that in India there is only one community  Sardar Patel, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25 May 1949 Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution If something of value is traded off for mere self-interest, then we naturally have compromised in the bad sense. However, if one value is partially traded off for another value, especially in an open process of free deliberation among equals, then the compromise arrived in this manner can hardly be objected to.  We may lament that we could not have everything but to secure a bit of all things important cannot be morally blame- worthy.  Besides, a commitment to the idea that decisions on the most important issues must be arrived at consensually rather than by majority vote is equally The Indian Constitution can be subjected to many criticisms of which three may be briefly mentioned: first, that it is unwieldy; second, that it is unrepresentative and third, that it is alien to our conditions. The criticism that it is unwieldy is based on the assumption that the entire constitution of a country must be found in one compact document.  But this is not true even of countries such as the US which do have a compact constitution.  The fact is that a country s constitution is to be identified with a compact document and with other written documents with constitutional status. Thus, it is possible to find important constitutional statements and practices outside one compact document. In the case of India, many such details, practices and statements are included in one single document and this has made that document somewhat large in size. Many countries for instance, do not have provisions for election commission or the civil service commission in the document known as constitution. But in India, many such matters are attended to by the Constitutional document itself. A second criticism of the Constitution is that it is unrepresentative. Do you remember how the Constituent Assembly was formed? At that time, adult franchise was I understand compromises in the design of institutions, but how can Indian Constitution at Work not yet granted and most members came from the advanced sections of the society. Does this make our Constitution unrepresentative? Here we must distinguish two components of representation, one that might be called voice and the other opinion.  The voice component of representation is important.  People must be recognised in their own language or voice, not in the language of the masters.  If we look at the Indian Constitution from this dimension, it is indeed unrepresentative because members of the Constituent Assembly were chosen by a restricted franchise, not by universal suffrage.  However, if we examine the other dimension, we may not find it altogether lacking in representativeness. The claim that almost every shade of opinion was represented in the Constituent Assembly may be a trifle exaggerated but may have something to it.  If we read the debates that took place in the Constituent Assembly, we find that a vast range of issues and opinions were mentioned, members raised matters not only based on their individual social concerns but based on the perceived interests and concerns of various social sections as well. Is it a coincidence that the central square of every other small town has a statue of Dr. Ambedkar with a copy of the Indian Constitution?  Far from being a mere symbolic tribute to him, this expresses the feeling among Dalits that the Constitution reflects many of their aspirations. A final criticism alleges that the Indian Constitution is entirely an alien document, borrowed article by article from western constitutions and sits uneasily with the cultural ethos of the Indian people. This criticism is often voiced by many. Even in the Constituent Assembly itself, there were some voices that echo this concern. How far is this charge true? It is true that the Indian Constitution is modern and partly western. Do you remember that in the first chapter we have listed the various sources from which our Constitution  borrowed ? But in this chapter you have also Of course! Isn t it what we learnt in the first chapter? That there should be a valid reason for every section of society to go along with Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution seen that it was never a blind borrowing. It was innovative borrowing. Besides, as we shall see, this does not make it entirely alien. First, many Indians have not only adopted modern ways of thinking, but have made these their own. For them westernisation became a form of protest against the filth in their own tradition. Rammohan Roy started this trend and it is continued to this day by Dalits. Indeed, as early as 1841, it was noticed that the Dalit people of northern India were not afraid to use the newly introduced legal system and bring suits against their landlords. So, this new instrument of modern law was effectively adopted by the people to address questions of dignity and justice. Second, when western modernity began to interact with local cultural systems, something like a hybrid culture began to emerge, possibly by creative adaptation, for which a parallel can be found neither in western modernity nor in indigenous tradition. This cluster of newly developed phenomenon forged out of western modern and indigenous traditional cultural systems have the character of a different, alternative modernity. In non-western societies, different modernities emerged as non-western societies tried to break loose not only from their own past practices but also from the shackles of a particular version of western modernity imposed on them. Thus, when we were drafting our Constitution, efforts were made to amalgamate western and traditional Indian values. It was a process of selective adaptation and not borrowing. All this is not to say that the Constitution of India is a perfect and flawless document. Given the social conditions within which the  we wanted the music of Veena or Sitar, but here we have the music of an English band. That was because our constitution makers were educated that way.  That is exactly the kind of Constitution Mahatma Gandhi did not want and did not envisage.  CAD, Vol. XI, pp.616-617, 17 November 1949 Indian Constitution at Work Constitution was made, it was only natural that there may be many controversial matters, that there would be many areas that needed careful revision. There are many features of this Constitution that have emerged mainly due to the exigencies of the time. Nonetheless, we must admit that there are many limitations to this Constitution. Let us briefly mention the limitations of the Constitution. First, the Indian Constitution has a centralised idea of national unity. Second, it appears to have glossed over some important issues of gender justice, particularly within Third, it is not clear why in a poor developing country, certain basic socio-economic rights were relegated to the section on Directive Principles rather than made an integral feature of our fundamental rights. It is possible to give answers to these limitations, to explain why this happened, or even to overcome them. But that is not our point. We are arguing that these limitations are not serious enough to jeopardise the philosophy of the In the previous chapter we described the Constitution as a living document. It is these core features of the Constitution that give it this stature of a living document. Legal provisions and institutional arrangements depend upon the needs of the society and the philosophy adopted by the society. The Constitution gives expression to this philosophy. The institutional arrangements that we studied throughout this book are based on a core and commonly agreed vision. That vision has historically emerged through our struggle for independence. The Constituent Assembly was the platform on which this vision was stated, refined and articulated in legal-institutional form. Thus, the No document can be perfect and no ideals can be fully achieved. But does that mean we should have no ideals? No vision? Am I Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution Constitution becomes the embodiment of this vision. Many people have said that the best summary of this vision or the philosophy of the Constitution is to be found in the preamble to Have you carefully read the preamble? Apart from the various objectives mentioned in it, the preamble makes a very humble claim: the Constitution is not  given  by a body of great men, it is prepared and adopted by  We, the people of India. Thus, the people are themselves the makers of their own destinies, and democracy is the instrument that people have used for shaping their present and their future. More than five decades since the Constitution was drafted, we have fought over many matters, we have seen that the courts and the governments have disagreed on many interpretations, the centre and the States have many differences of opinion, and political parties have fought bitterly. As you will study next year, our politics has been full of problems and shortcomings. And yet, if you asked the politician or the common citizen, you will find that every one continues to share in that famous vision embodied in the Constitution: we want to live together and prosper together on the basis of the principles of equality, liberty and fraternity. This sharing in the vision or the philosophy of the Constitution is the valuable outcome of the working of the Constitution. In 1950, making of this Constitution was a great achievement. Today, keeping alive the philosophical vision of that Constitution may be our important achievement. The following are certain laws. Are they connected with any value? If yes, then what is the underlying value? Give reasons. Both daughters and sons will have share in the family property. There will be different slabs of sales tax on different consumer Religious instructions will not be given in any government There shall be no begar or forced labour. Indian Constitution at Work 2. Which of the options given below cannot be used to complete the Democratic countries need a constitution to Check the power of the government. Protect minorities from majority. Bring independence from colonial rule. Ensure that a long-term vision is not lost by momentary Bring social change in peaceful manner. The following are different positions about reading and understanding Constituent Assembly debates. Which of these statements argues that Constituent Assembly debates are relevant even today? Which statement says that they are not relevant? With which of these positions do you agree and why? Common people are too busy in earning livelihood and meeting different pressures of life. They can t understand the legal language of  these debates. The conditions and challenges today are different from the time when the Constitution was made. To read the ideas of Constitution makers and use them for our new times is trying to bring past in the present Our ways of understanding the world and the present challenges have not changed totally. Constituent Assembly debates can provide us reasons why certain practises are important. In a period when constitutional practises are being challenged, not knowing the reasons can destroy them. 4.  Explain the difference between the Indian Constitution and western ideas in the light of Understanding of secularism. Articles 370 and 371. Universal adult franchise. Which of the following  principles of secularism are adopted in the Constitution of India? a. that state will have nothing to do with religion b. that state will have close relation with religion c. that state can discriminate among religions Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution that state will recognise rights of religious groups that state will have limited powers to intervene in affairs of Match the following. Freedom to criticise treatment of widows Taking decisions in the ii. Procedural achievement constituent assembly on the basis of reason, not self interest Accepting importance of iii. Neglect of gender justice community in an individual s Article 370 and 371 iv. Liberal individualism Unequal rights to women v. Attention to requirements of regarding family property and a particular region This discussion was taking place in a class. Read the various arguments and state which of these do you agree with and why. Jayesh: I still think that our Constitution is only a borrowed Saba: Do you mean to say that there is nothing Indian in it? But is there such a thing as Indian and western in the case of values and ideas? Take equality between men and women. What is western about it? And even if it is, should we reject it only because it is Jayesh: What I mean is that after fighting for independence from the British, did we not adopt their system of parliamentary Indian Constitution at Work Neha: You forget that when we fought the British, we were not against the British as such, we were against the principle of colonialism. That has nothing to do with adopting a system of government that we wanted, wherever it came from. 8. Why is it said that the making of the Indian Constitution was unrepresentative? Give reasons for your answer. 9. One of the limitations of the Constitution of India is that it does not adequately attend to gender justice. What evidence can you give to substantiate this charge? If you were writing the Constitution today, what provisions would you recommend for remedying this limitation? 10. Do you agree with the statement that  it is not clear why in a poor developing country, certain basic socio-economic rights were relegated to the section on Directive Principles rather than made an integral feature of our Fundamental Rights ? Give reasons for your answer. What do you think are the possible reasons for putting socio-economic rights in the section on Directive Principles? 11. How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November REQUEST FOR FEEDBACK How did you like this textbook? What was your experience in reading or using this? What were the difficulties you faced? What changes would you like to see in the next version of this book? Write to us on all these and any other matter related to this textbook. You could be a teacher, a parent, a student or just a general reader. We value any and every feedback. Please write to: Coordinator (Political Science) Department of Education in Social Sciences (DESS) National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016.


=== Class12_Polity ===

The Berlin Wall, which had been built at the height of the Cold War and was its greatest symbol, was toppled by the people in 1989. This dramatic event was followed by an equally dramatic and historic chain of events that led to the collapse of the  second world  and the end of the Cold War. Germany, divided after the Second World War, was unified. One after another, the eight East European countries that were part of the Soviet bloc replaced their communist governments in response to mass demonstrations. The Soviet Union stood by as the Cold War began to end, not by military means but as a result of mass actions by ordinary men and women. Eventually the Soviet Union itself disintegrated. In this chapter, we discuss the meaning, the causes and the consequences of the disintegration of the  second world. We also discuss what happened to that part of the world after the collapse of communist regimes and how India relates to these countries now. The End of Bipolarity The Berlin Wall symbolised the division between the capitalist and the communist world. Built in 1961 to separate East Berlin from West Berlin, this more than 150 kilometre long wall stood for 28 years and was finally broken by the people on 9 November 1989. This marked the unification of the two parts of Germany and the beginning of the end of the communist bloc. The pictures here depict: 1. People making a tiny hole in the wall 2. A section of the wall opened to allow free movement 3. The Berlin Wall as it stood before 1989 Credit: 1. and 2. Frederik Ramm, www.remote.org/frederik/culture/berlin Contemporary World Politics machinery production, and a transport sector that connected its remotest areas with efficiency. It had a domestic consumer industry that produced everything from pins to cars, though their quality did not match that of the Western capitalist countries. The Soviet state ensured a minimum standard of living for all citizens, and the government subsidised basic necessities including health, education, childcare and other welfare schemes. State ownership was the dominant form of ownership: land and productive assets were owned and controlled by the Soviet state. The Soviet system, however, became very bureaucratic and authoritarian, making life very difficult for its citizens. Lack of democracy and the absence of freedom of speech stifled people who often expressed their dissent in jokes and cartoons. Most of the institutions of the Soviet state needed reform: the one- party system represented by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union had tight control over all institutions and was unaccountable to the people. The party refused to recognise the urge of people in the fifteen different republics that formed the Soviet Union to manage their own affairs including their cultural affairs. Although, on paper, Russia was only one of the fifteen republics that together constituted the USSR, in reality Russia dominated everything, and people from other regions felt neglected and often suppressed. What was the Soviet The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)  came into being after the socialist revolution in Russia in 1917. The revolution was inspired by the ideals of socialism, as opposed to capitalism, and the need for an egalitarian society. This was perhaps the biggest attempt in human history to abolish the institution of private property and consciously design a society based on principles of equality. In doing so, the makers of the Soviet system gave primacy to the state and the institution of the party. The Soviet political system centred around the communist party, and no other political party or opposition was allowed. The economy was planned and controlled by the state. After the Second World War, the east European countries that the Soviet army had liberated from the fascist forces came under the control of the USSR. The political and the economic systems of all these countries were modelled after the USSR. This group of countries was called the Second World or the  socialist bloc. The Warsaw Pact, a military alliance, held them together. The USSR was the leader of the bloc. The Soviet Union became a great power after the Second World War. The Soviet economy was then more developed than the rest of the world except for the US. It had a complex communications network, vast energy resources including oil, iron and steel, Founder of the leader of the of 1917 and the the USSR during the most difficult a source of over the world. LEADERS OF THE The End of Bipolarity Successor to Lenin and led the Soviet Union during its in the Second World War;  held the Great Terror of the 1930s, rivals within the LEADERS OF THE Gorbachev, did not intervene when the disturbances occurred, and the communist regimes collapsed one after another. These developments were accompanied by a rapidly escalating crisis within the USSR that hastened its disintegration. Gorbachev initiated the policies of economic and political reform and democratisation within the country. The reforms were opposed by leaders within the A coup took place in 1991 that was encouraged by Communist Party hardliners. The people had tasted freedom by then and did not want the old-style rule of the Communist Party. Boris Yeltsin emerged as a national hero in opposing this coup. The Russian Republic, where Yeltsin won a popular election, began to shake off centralised control. Power began to shift from the Soviet centre to the republics, especially in the more Europeanised part of the Soviet Union, which saw themselves as sovereign states. The Central Asian republics did not ask for independence and wanted to remain with the Soviet Federation. In December 1991, under the leadership of Yeltsin, Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, three major republics of the USSR, declared that the Soviet Union was disbanded. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union was banned. Capitalism and democracy were adopted as the bases for the post-Soviet In the arms race, the Soviet Union managed to match the US from time to time, but at great cost. The Soviet Union lagged behind the West in technology, infrastructure (e.g., transport, power), and most importantly, in fulfilling the political or economic aspirations of citizens. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 weakened the system even further. Though wages continued to grow, productivity and technology fell considerably behind that of the West. This led to shortages in all consumer goods. Food imports increased every year. The Soviet economy was faltering in the late 1970s and became stagnant. Gorbachev and the Mikhail Gorbachev, who had become General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1985, sought to reform this system. Reforms were necessary to keep the USSR abreast of the information and technological revolutions taking place in the West. However, Gorbachev s decision to normalise relations with the West and democratise and reform the Soviet Union had some other effects that neither he nor anyone else intended or anticipated. The people in the East European countries which were part of the Soviet bloc started to protest against their own governments and Soviet control. Unlike in the past, the Soviet Union, under Contemporary World Politics The declaration on the disintegration of the USSR and the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) came as a surprise to the other republics, especially to the Central Asian ones. The exclusion of these republics was an issue that was quickly solved by making them founding members of the CIS. Russia was now accepted as the successor state of the Soviet Union. It inherited the Soviet seat in the UN Security Council. Russia accepted all the international treaties and commitments of the Soviet Union. It took over as the only nuclear state of the post- Soviet space and carried out some nuclear disarmament measures with the US. The old Soviet Union was thus dead and buried. Why did the Soviet Union How did the second most powerful country in the world suddenly disintegrate? This is a question worth asking not just to understand the Soviet Union and the end of communism but also because it is not the first and may not be the last political system to collapse. While there are unique features of the Soviet collapse, there may be more general lessons to be drawn from this very important case. There is no doubt that the internal weaknesses of Soviet political and economic institutions, which failed to meet the aspirations of the people, were responsible for the collapse of the system. Economic stagnation for many years led to severe consumer shortages and a large section of Soviet society began to doubt and question the system and to do so openly. Why did the system become so weak and why did the economy stagnate?  The answer is partially clear. The Soviet economy used much of its resources in maintaining a nuclear and military arsenal and the development of its satellite states in Eastern Europe and within the Soviet system (the five Central Asian Republics in particular). This led to a huge economic burden that the system could not cope with. At the same time, ordinary citizens became more knowledgeable about the economic advance of the West. They could see the disparities between their system and the systems of the West. After years of being told that the Soviet A Communist Party bureaucrat drives down from Moscow to a collective farm to register a potato harvest.  Comrade farmer, how has the harvest been this year?  the official asks.  Oh, by the grace of God, we had mountains of potatoes,  answers the  But there is no God,  counters the official.  Huh, says the farmer,  And there are no mountains of potatoes either.  Leader of the some reforms in with the West; in Hungary and in the Cuban missile LEADERS OF THE I am amazed! How could so many all over the world admire a system like The End of Bipolarity system was better than Western capitalism, the reality of its backwardness came as a political and psychological shock. The Soviet Union had become stagnant in an administrative and political sense as well. The Communist Party that had ruled the Soviet Union for over 70 years was not accountable to the people. Ordinary people were alienated by slow and stifling administration, rampant corruption, the inability of the system to correct mistakes it had made, the unwillingness to allow more openness in government, and the centralisation of authority in a vast land. Worse still, the party bureaucrats gained more privileges than ordinary citizens. People did not identify with the system and with the rulers, and the government increasingly lost Gorbachev s reforms promised to deal with these problems. Gorbachev promised to reform the economy, catch up with the West, and loosen the administrative system. You may wonder why the Soviet Union collapsed in spite of Gorbachev s accurate diagnosis of the problem and his attempt to implement reforms. Here is where the answers become more controversial, and we have to depend on future historians to guide us better. The most basic answer seems to be that when Gorbachev carried out his reforms and loosened the system, he set in motion forces and expectations that few could have predicted and became virtually impossible to control.  There were sections of Soviet society which felt that Gorbachev should have moved much faster and were disappointed and impatient with his methods. They did not benefit in the way they had hoped, or they benefited too slowly. Others, especially members of the Communist Party and those who were served by the system, took exactly the opposite view. They felt that their power and privileges were eroding and Gorbachev was moving too quickly. In this  tug of war, Gorbachev lost support on all sides and divided public opinion.  Even those who were with him became disillusioned as they felt that he did not adequately defend his own policies. All this might not have led to the collapse of the Soviet Union but for another development that surprised most observers and indeed many insiders. The rise of nationalism and the desire for sovereignty within various republics including Russia and the Baltic Republics (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania), Ukraine, Georgia, and others proved to be the final and most immediate cause for the disintegration of the USSR. Here again there are One view is that nationalist urges and feelings were very much at work throughout the history of the Soviet Union and that whether or not the reforms had occurred there would have been an internal struggle within the Soviet Union. This is a  what-if  of history, but surely it is not an unreasonable Leader of the Soviet Union (1964- the d tente phase in relations with the US; involved in suppressing a and in invading LEADERS OF THE Contemporary World Politics LEADERS OF THE of the Soviet arms race with the US; withdrew Soviet troops from helped in the the Cold War; blamed for the the Soviet Union. view given the size and diversity of the Soviet Union and its growing internal problems. Others think that Gorbachev s reforms speeded up and increased nationalist dissatisfaction to the point that the government and rulers could not control it. Ironically, during the Cold War many thought that nationalist unrest would be strongest in the Central Asian republics given their ethnic and religious differences with the rest of the Soviet Union and their economic backwardness. However, as things turned out, TIMELINE OF DISINTEGRATION OF THE SOVIET UNION 1985 March: Mikhail Gorbachev elected as the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union; appoints Boris Yeltsin as the head of the Communist Party in Moscow; initiates a series of reforms in the Soviet Union 1988 June: Independence movement begins in Lithuania; later spreads to Estonia and Latvia 1989 October: Soviet Union declares that the Warsaw Pact members are free to decide their own futures; Berlin Wall falls in November 1990 February: Gorbachev strips the Soviet Communist Party of its 72-year-long monopoly on power by calling on the Soviet parliament (Duma) to permit 1990 March: Lithuania becomes the first of the 15 Soviet republics to declare 1990 June: Russian parliament declares its independence from the Soviet Union 1991 June: Yeltsin, no longer in the Communist Party, becomes the President 1991 August: The Communist Party hardliners stage an abortive coup against 1991 September: Three Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania become UN members (later join NATO in March 2004) 1991 December: Russia, Belarus and Ukraine decide to annul the 1922 Treaty on the Creation of the USSR and establish the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS); Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan join the CIS (Georgia joins later in 1993); Russia takes over the USSR seat in the United Nations 1991 December 25: Gorbachev resigns as the President of the Soviet Union; the end of the Soviet Union The End of Bipolarity nationalist dissatisfaction with the Soviet Union was strongest in the more  European  and prosperous part   in Russia and the Baltic areas as well as Ukraine and Georgia. Ordinary people here felt alienated from the Central Asians and from each other and concluded also that they were paying too high an economic price to keep the more backward areas within the Soviet Union. The collapse of the second world of the Soviet Union and the socialist systems in eastern Europe had profound consequences for world politics. Let us note here three broad kinds of enduring changes that resulted from it. Each of these had a number of effects that we cannot list here. First of all, it meant the end of Cold War confrontations. The ideological dispute over whether the socialist system would beat the capitalist system was not an issue any more. Since this dispute had engaged the military of the two blocs, had triggered a massive arms race and accumulation of nuclear weapons, and had led to the existence of military blocs, the end of the confrontation demanded an end to this arms race and a possible new peace. Second, power relations in world politics changed and, therefore, the relative influence of ideas and institutions also changed. The end of the Cold War left open only two possibilities: either the remaining superpower would dominate and create a unipolar system, or different countries or groups of countries could become important players in the international system, thereby bringing in a multipolar system where no one power could dominate. As it turned out, the US became the sole superpower. Backed by the power and prestige of the US, the capitalist economy was now the dominant economic system internationally. Institutions like the World Bank and International Monetary Fund became powerful advisors to all these countries since they gave them loans for their transitions to capitalism. Politically, the notion of liberal democracy emerged as the best way to organise Third, the end of the Soviet bloc meant the emergence of many new countries. All these countries had their own independent aspirations and choices. Some of them, especially the Baltic and east European states, wanted to join the European Union and become part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). The Central Asian countries wanted to take advantage of their geographical location and continue their close ties with Russia and also to establish ties with the West, the US, China and others. Thus, the international system saw many new players emerge, each with its own identity, interests, and economic and political difficulties. It is to these issues that we now turn. LEADERS OF THE The first elected 1999); rose to power in the Party and was made the Mayor of Moscow by joined the critics and left the led the protests against the Soviet regime in 1991; played a key role in dissolving the Soviet Union; by Russians in Contemporary World Politics Each of these countries was required to make a total shift to a capitalist economy, which meant rooting out completely any structures evolved during the Soviet period. Above all, it meant that private ownership was to be the dominant pattern of ownership of property. Privatisation of state assets and corporate ownership patterns were to be immediately brought in. Collective farms were to be replaced by private farming and capitalism in agriculture. This transition ruled out any alternate or  third way, other than state-controlled socialism Shock Therapy in The collapse of communism was followed in most of these countries by a painful process of transition from an authoritarian socialist system to a democratic capitalist system. The model of transition in Russia, Central Asia and east Europe that was influenced by the World Bank and the IMF came to be known as  shock therapy. Shock therapy varied in intensity and speed amongst the former second world countries, but its direction and features were quite Source: https://www.unicef.org/hac2012/images/HAC2012_CEE-CIS_map_REVISED.gif Note:	The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. I heard someone say  The end of the Soviet Union does not mean the end of socialism.  Is that Map of Central, Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States The End of Bipolarity Shock therapy also involved a drastic change in the external orientation of these economies. Development was now envisaged through more trade, and thus a sudden and complete switch to free trade was considered essential. The free trade regime and foreign direct investment (FDI) were to be the main engines of change. This also involved openness to foreign investment, financial opening up or deregulation, and currency Finally, the transition also involved a break up of the existing trade alliances among the countries of the Soviet bloc. Each state from this bloc was now linked directly to the West and not to each other in the region. These states were thus to be gradually absorbed into the Western economic system. The Western capitalist states now became the leaders and thus guided and controled the development of the region through various agencies Consequences of Shock The shock therapy administered in the 1990s did not lead the people into the promised utopia of mass consumption. Generally, it brought ruin to the economies and disaster upon the people of the entire region. In Russia, the large state-controlled industrial complex almost collapsed, as about 90 per cent of its industries were put up for sale to private individuals and companies. Since the restructuring was carried out through market forces and not by government- directed industrial policies, it led to the virtual disappearance of entire industries. This was called  the largest garage sale in history, as valuable industries were undervalued and sold at throwaway prices. Though all citizens were given vouchers to participate in the sales, most citizens sold their vouchers in the black market because they needed the money. The value of the ruble, the Russian currency, declined dramatically. The rate of inflation was so high that people lost all their savings. The collective farm system disintegrated leaving people without food security, and Russia started to import food.  The real GDP of Russia in 1999 was below what it was in 1989. The old trading structure broke down with no alternative in its place. The old system of social welfare was systematically destroyed. The withdrawal of government subsidies pushed large sections of the people into poverty. The middle classes were pushed to the periphery of society, and the academic and intellectual manpower disintegrated or migrated. A mafia emerged in most of these countries and started controlling many economic activities. Privatisation led to new disparities. Post-Soviet states, especially Russia, were divided I can see the shock. But where is the therapy? Why do we talk in such Contemporary World Politics between rich and poor regions. Unlike the earlier system, there was now great economic inequality between people. T h e  c o n s t r u c t i o n  o f democratic institutions was not given the same attention and priority as the demands of economic transformation. The constitutions of all these countries were drafted in a hurry and most, including Russia, had a strong executive president with the widest possible powers that rendered elected parliaments relatively weak. In Central Asia, the presidents had great powers, and several of them became very authoritarian. For example, the presidents of Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan appointed themselves to power first for ten years and then extended it for another ten years. They allowed no dissent or opposition. A judicial culture and independence of the judiciary was yet to be established in most of these countries. Most of these economies, especially Russia, started reviving in 2000, ten years after their independence. The reason for the revival for most of their economies was the export of natural resources like oil, natural gas and minerals. Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are major oil and gas producers. Other countries have gained because of the oil pipelines that cross their territories for which they get rent. Some amount of manufacturing has restarted. Tensions and Conflicts Most of the former Soviet Republics are prone to conflicts, and many have had civil wars and insurgencies.  Complicating the picture is the growing involvement of outside powers. In Russia, two republics, C h e c h n ya  a n d D a gest an, have had violent secessionist movements. Moscow s method of dealing with the Chechen rebels and indiscriminate military bombings have led to many human rights violations but failed to deter the aspirations for In Central Asia, Tajikistan witnessed a civil war that went on for ten years till 2001. The region as a whole has many sectarian conflicts. In Azerbaijan s province of Nagorno-Karabakh, some local Armenians want to secede and join Armenia. In Georgia, the demand for independence has come from two provinces, resulting in a civil war. There are movements against the existing regimes in Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan and Georgia. Countries and provinces are fighting over river waters. All this has led to instability, making life difficult for the ordinary citizen. The Central Asian Republics are areas with vast hydrocarbon resources, which have brought them economic benefit. Central Asia has also become a zone of competition between outside powers and oil companies. The region is next to Russia, China, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and What is the difference If you succeed, you are celebrated as a nationalist hero, and if you fail you are condemned for crimes As a result of about half of banks and other This image is that largest bank, that went bankrupt in 1998. As a result, the money of lost, along with the money kept in the bank by The End of Bipolarity close to West Asia. After 11 September 2001, the US wanted military bases in the region and paid the governments of all Central Asian states to hire bases and to allow airplanes to fly over their territory during the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. However, Russia perceives these states as its  Near Abroad  and believes that they should be under Russian influence. China has interests here because of the oil resources, and the Chinese have begun to settle around the borders and I n  e a s t e r n  E u r o p e, Czechoslovakia split peacefully into two, with the Czechs and the Slovaks forming independent countries. But the most severe conflict took place in the Balkan republics of Yugoslavia. After 1991, it broke apart with several provinces like Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina declaring independence. Ethnic Serbs opposed this, and a massacre of non-Serb Bosnians followed. The NATO intervention and the bombing of Yugoslavia followed the inter-ethnic civil war. India and Post-communist India has maintained good relations with all the post- communist countries. But the strongest relations are still those between Russia and India. India s relations with Russia are an important aspect of India s foreign policy. Indo-Russian relations are embedded in a history of trust and common interests and are matched by popular perceptions. Indian heroes from Raj Kapoor to Amitabh Bachchan are household names in Russia and many post- Soviet countries. One can hear Hindi film songs all over the region, and India is part of the Russia and India share a vision of a multipolar world order. What they mean by a multipolar world Seven years after the Soviet Union collapsed, the Uzbek passion for Indian films continues. Within months of the release of the latest film in India, pirate copies were already on sale in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent. Mohammed Sharif Pat runs a shop selling Indian films near one of Tashkent s biggest markets. He is an Afghan who brings videos from the Pakistani frontier town Peshawar.  There are many people who love Indian films here. I d say at least 70% of the people in Tashkent buy them. We sell about 100 videos a day. I ve just had to put in an order for a thousand more,  he says.  The Uzbeks are Central Asians, they are part of Asia. They have a common culture. That s why they like Indian films.  Despite the shared history, for many Indians living in Uzbekistan, the passion the Uzbeks have for their films and film stars has come as a bit of a surprise.  Wherever we go and meet local dignitaries - even ministers or cabinet ministers - during our conversation it is always mentioned,  says Ashok Shamer from the Indian embassy in Tashkent.  This shows that Indian films, culture, songs and especially Raj Kapoor have been household names here. Most of them can sing some Hindi songs, they may not know the meaning but their pronunciation is correct and they know the music,  he says.  I have found out that almost all my neighbours can sing and play Hindi songs. This was really a big surprise to me when I came to Uzbekistan.  A report by the BBC s Central Asia Correspondent Louise Hidalgo BOLLYWOOD STIRS UZBEK Make a list of India and the USSR in their Contemporary World Politics AND THE  USSR During the Cold War era, India and the USSR enjoyed a special relationship which led critics to say that India was part of the Soviet camp. It was a multi- Economic: The Soviet Union assisted India s public sector companies at a time when such assistance was difficult to get. It gave aid and technical assistance for steel plants like Bhilai, Bokaro, Visakhapatnam, and machinery plants like Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., etc. The Soviet Union accepted Indian currency for trade when India was short of foreign Political: The Soviet Union supported India s positions on the Kashmir issue in the UN. It also supported India during its major conflicts, especially during the war with Pakistan in 1971. India too supported Soviet foreign policy in some crucial but indirect ways. Military: India received most of its military hardware from the Soviet Union at a time when few other countries were willing to part with military technologies. The Soviet Union entered into various agreements allowing India to jointly produce Culture: Hindi films and Indian culture were popular in the Soviet Union. A large number of Indian writers and artists visited the USSR. order is the co-existence of several powers in the international system, collective security (in which an attack on any country is regarded as a threat to all countries and requires a collective response), greater regionalism, negotiated settlements of international conflicts, an independent foreign policy for all countries, and decision making through bodies like the UN that should be strengthened, democratised, and empowered. More than 80 bilateral agreements have been signed between India and Russia as part of the Indo-Russian Strategic Agreement of 2001. India stands to benefit from its relationship with Russia on issues like Kashmir, energy supplies, sharing information on international terrorism,  	 Select any five Cold War allies each of the Soviet Union and the US.  	 Divide the class accordingly (10 groups). Allot a country to each group. Assign the group to collect information on the political, social and economic profile of these countries during the Cold War days.  	 They should also prepare a profile of that country after the collapse of communism and say what difference, if any, the disintegration of the second world made to that country.  	 Each group is to present its findings to the entire class. Ensure that students talk about how people of these countries felt about themselves Ideas for the Teacher You could link the students  findings to the working of the democratic system and communist system and highlight the pros and cons of both these systems. You could encourage the students to discuss if there is an alternative to both communism and capitalism. The End of Bipolarity access to Central Asia, and balancing its relations with China. Russia stands to benefit from this relationship because India is the second largest arms market for Russia. The Indian military gets most of its hardware from Russia. Since India is an oil-importing nation, Russia is important to India and has repeatedly come to the assistance of India during its oil crises. India is seeking to increase its energy imports from Russia and the republics of Kazakhstan and with these republics includes partnership and investment in oilfields.  Russia is important for India s nuclear energy plans and assisted India s space industry by giving, for example, the cryogenic rocket when India needed it. Russia and India have collaborated on various scientific Which among the following statements that describe the nature of Soviet economy is wrong? Socialism was the dominant ideology State ownership/control existed over the factors of production People enjoyed economic freedom Every aspect of the economy was planned and controlled by Arrange the following in chronological order: Soviet invasion of Afghanistan Fall of the Berlin Wall Disintegration of the Soviet Union Which among the following is NOT an outcome of the disintegration of the USSR? End of the ideological war between the US and USSR Birth of CIS Change in the balance of power in the world order Crises in the Middle East Match the following: i.	 Mikhail Gorbachev a. 	 Successor of USSR ii.	 Shock Therapy b. 	 Military pact c. 	 Introduced reforms iv.	 Boris Yeltsin d.	 Economic model e. 	 President of Russia E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s Contemporary World Politics E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s 5. 	 Fill in the blanks. The Soviet political system was based on ___________________ _________________ was the military alliance started by the USSR. ____________________ party dominated the Soviet Union s ______________________ initiated the reforms in the USSR in 1985. The fall of the ____________________ symbolised the end of the 6. 	 Mention any three features that distinguish the Soviet economy from that of a capitalist country like the US. 7. 	 What were the factors that forced Gorbachev to initiate the reforms in the USSR? 8. 	 What were the major consequences of the disintegration of the Soviet Union for countries like India? 9. 	 What was Shock Therapy? Was this the best way to make a transition from communism to capitalism? 10. 	 Write an essay for or against the following proposition:  With the disintegration of the second world, India should change its foreign policy and focus more on friendship with the US rather than with traditional friends like Russia. After the end of the bipolar structure of world politics in the early 1990s, it became clear that alternative centres of political and economic power could limit America s dominance. Thus, in Europe, the European Union (EU) and, in Asia, the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), have emerged as forces to reckon with. While evolving regional solutions to their historical enmities and weaknesses, both the EU and the ASEAN have developed alternative institutions and conventions that build a more peaceful and cooperative regional order and have transformed the countries in the region into prosperous economies. The economic rise of China has made a dramatic impact on world politics. In this chapter, we take a look at some of these emerging alternative centres of power and assess their possible role in the future. Centres of Power The two images here represent two phases of the history of China. The red poster    The Socialist Road is the Broadest of All    represents the ideology that guided China during its early phase after the Revolution. The photograph below is that of the city of Shanghai, the symbol of China s new economic Contemporary World Politics As the Second World War came to an end, many of Europe s leaders grappled with the  Question of Europe. Should Europe be allowed to revert to its old rivalries or be reconstructed on principles and institutions that would contribute to a positive conception of international relations? The Second World War shattered many of the assumptions and structures on which the European states had based their relations. In 1945, the European states confronted the ruin of their economies and the destruction of the assumptions and structures on which Europe had been founded. European integration after 1945 was aided by the Cold War. America extended massive financial help for reviving Europe s economy under what was called the  Marshall Plan. The US also created a new collective security structure under NATO. Under the Marshall Plan, the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) was established in 1948 to channel aid to the west European states. It became a forum where the western European states began to cooperate on trade and economic issues. The Council of Europe, established in 1949, was another step forward in political cooperation. The process of economic integration of European capitalist countries proceeded step by step (see Timeline of European Integration) leading to the formation of the European Economic Community in 1957. This process acquired a political dimension with the creation of the European Parliament. The collapse of the Soviet bloc put Europe on a fast track and resulted in the establishment of the European Union in 1992. The foundation was thus laid for a common foreign and security policy, cooperation on justice and home affairs, and the creation of a single currency. The European Union has evolved over time from an e c o n o m i c  u n i o n  t o  a n increasingly political one. The EU has started to act more as a nation state. While the attempts to have a Constitution for the EU have failed, it has its own flag, anthem, founding date, and currency. It also has some form of a common foreign and security policy in its dealings with other nations.  The European Union has tried to expand areas of cooperation while acquiring new The European Union Flag The circle of gold stars stands for solidarity and harmony between the peoples of Europe. It has twelve stars, as the number twelve is traditionally the symbol of perfection, completeness and unity. Source: http://europa.eu/abc/symbols/emblem/index_en.htm Contemporary Centres of Power members, especially from the erstwhile Soviet bloc. The process has not proved easy, for people in many countries are not very enthusiastic in giving the EU powers that were exercised by the government of their country. There are also reservations about including some new countries within the EU. The EU has economic, political and diplomatic, and military influence. The European Union s GDP is projected to be approximately $19.35 trillion in the year 2024. Its currency, the euro, can pose a threat to the dominance of the US dollar. Its share of world trade is much larger than that of the United States allowing it to be more assertive in trade disputes with the US and China. Its economic power gives it influence over its closest neighbours as well as in Asia and Africa. It also functions as an important bloc in international Oh, now I know what a Schengen visa means! Under the Schengen agreement, you have to get a visa from just one of the EU countries and that allows you entry in most of the other European European Union Map Contemporary World Politics seat on the UN Security Council. The EU includes several non- permanent members of the UNSC. This has enabled the EU to influence some US policies such as the current US position on Iran s nuclear programme. Its use of diplomacy, economic investments, and negotiations rather than coercion and military force has been effective as in the case of its dialogue with China on human rights and environmental Militarily, the EU s combined armed forces are the second largest in the world. Its total spending on defence is second after the US. One EU member state, France, also has nuclear arsenals of approximately 335 nuclear warheads. It is also the world s second most important source of space and As a supranational organi- sation, the EU is able to intervene in economic, political and social areas. But in many areas its member states have their own foreign relations and defence policies that are often at odds with each other. Thus, Britain s Prime Minister Tony Blair was America s partner in the Iraq invasion, and many of the EU s newer members made up the US-led  coalition of the willing  whereas Germany and France opposed American policy. There is also a deep-seated  Euro- skepticism  in some parts TIMELINE OF EUROPEAN 1951 April: Six west European countries, France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg sign the Treaty of Paris establishing the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). 1957 March 25: These six countries sign the Treaties of Rome establishing the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). 1973 January: Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom join the European Economic Community (EEC). 1979 June: First direct elections to the European Parliament 1981 January: Greece joins the EEC. 1985 June: The Schengen Agreement abolishes border controls among the EEC members. 1986 January: Spain and Portugal join the EEC. 1990 October: Unification of Germany. 1992 February 7: The Treaty of Maastricht was signed establishing the European Union (EU). 1993 January: European Economic Community (EEC) was renamed the European Community (EC). 1995 January: Austria, Finland and Sweden join the EU. 2002 January: Euro, the new currency, was introduced in the 12 EU members. 2004 May: Ten new members, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia join the EU. 2007 January: Bulgaria and Romania join the EU. Slovenia adopts the Euro. 2009 December: The Lisbon Treaty came into force. 2012: The EU is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 2013: Croatia becomes the 28th member of the EU. 2016: Referendum in Britain, 51.9 per cent voters decide that Britain exit (Brexit) from the EU. economic organisations such as the World Trade Organisation The EU also has political and diplomatic influence. One member Contemporary Centres of Power of Europe about the EU s integrationist agenda. Thus, for example, Britain s former prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, kept the UK out of the European Market. Denmark and Sweden have resisted the Maastricht Treaty and the adoption of the euro, the common European currency. This limits the ability of the EU to act in matters of foreign relations and defence. Association of South East Asian Nations Take a look at the political map of the world. Which countries would you say fall in the southeastern Imagine what would happen if they have a European Union region of Asia? Before and during the Second World War, this region of Asia suffered the economic and political consequences of repeated colonialisms, both European and Japanese. At the end of the war, it confronted problems of nation- building, the ravages of poverty and economic backwardness and the pressure to align with one great power or another during the Cold War. This was a recipe for conflict, which the countries of Southeast Asia could ill afford. Efforts at Asian and Third World unity, such as the Bandung Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, were ineffective in establishing the conventions for informal cooperation and interaction. Hence, the Southeast The cartoon appeared in 2003 when the European Union s initiative to draft a common constitution failed. Why does the cartoonist use the image of the ship Titanic to represent EU?   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics Asian alternative by establishing the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). ASEAN was established in 1967 by five countries of this region   Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand   by signing the Bangkok Declaration. The objectives of ASEAN were primarily to accelerate economic growth and through that  social progress and cultural development. A secondary objective was to promote regional peace and stability based on the rule of law and the principles of the United Nations Charter. Over the years, Brunei Darussalam, Vietnam, Lao PDR, Myanmar (Burma) and Cambodia joined ASEAN taking its strength to ten. Unlike the EU there is little desire in ASEAN for and institutions. ASEAN countries have celebrated what has become known as the  ASEAN Way, a form of interaction that is informal, cooperative. The respect for national sovereignty is critical to the functioning With some of the fastest growing economies in the world, ASEAN broadened its objectives beyond the economic and social spheres. In 2003, ASEAN moved along the path of the EU by agreeing to establish an ASEAN Community comprising three pillars, namely, the ASEAN Security Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and the ASEAN Socio- The ASEAN Flag In the ASEAN logo, the ten stalks of paddy (rice) represent the ten Southeast Asian countries bound together in friendship and solidarity. The circle symbolises the unity of ASEAN. Source: www.aseansec.org the map. Find of the ASEAN Source: http://www.unicef.org/eapro/EAP_map_final.gif Note: Maps on this site do not reflect a position by UNICEF on the legal status of any country or territory or the delimitation of any frontiers. Map of East Asia and Pacific Contemporary Centres of Power T h e  A S E A N  s e c u r i t y community was based on the conviction that outstanding territorial disputes should not escalate into armed confrontation. By 2003, ASEAN had several agreements in place by which peace, neutrality, cooperation, non-interference, and respect for national differences and sovereign rights. The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), which was established in 1994, is the organisation that carries out coordination of security and A S E A N  w a s  a n d  s t i l l remains principally an economic association. While the ASEAN region as a whole is a much smaller economy compared to the US, the EU, and Japan, its economy is growing much faster than all these. This accounts for the growth in its influence both in the region and beyond. The objectives of the ASEAN Economic Community are to create a common market and production base within ASEAN states and to aid social and economic development in the region. The Economic Community would also like to improve the existing ASEAN Dispute Settlement Mechanism to resolve economic disputes. ASEAN has focused on creating a Free Trade Area (FTA) for investment, labour, and services. The US and China have already moved fast to negotiate FTAs with ASEAN. ASEAN is rapidly growing into a very important regional organisation. Its Vision 2020 has defined an outward-looking role for ASEAN in the international community. This builds on the existing ASEAN policy to encourage negotiation over conflicts in the region. Thus, ASEAN has mediated the end of the Cambodian conflict, the East Timor crisis, and meets annually to discuss East Asian The current economic strength of ASEAN, especially its economic relevance as a trading and investment partner to the growing Asian economies such as India and China, makes this an attractive proposition. During the Cold War years Indian foreign policy did not pay adequate attention to ASEAN. But in recent years, India has tried to make amends. It signed trade agreements with three ASEAN members, Malaysia, Singapore and Isn t India a part of Southeast Asia? The are so close to the India s  Look East  Policy since the early 1990s and  Act East  Policy since 2014 have led to greater economic interaction with the East Asian nations (ASEAN, China, Japan and South Korea). Keshav, The Hindu Contemporary World Politics Thailand. The ASEAN-India FTA came into effect in 2010. ASEAN s strength, however, lies in its policies of interaction and consultation with member states, with dialogue partners, and with other non-regional organisations. It is the only regional association in Asia that provides a political forum where Asian countries and the major powers can discuss political and security concerns. regional affairs. The strength of its economy, together with other factors such as population, land mass, resources, regional location and political influence, adds to its power in significant ways. After the inception of the People s Republic of China in 1949, following the communist revolution under the leadership of Mao, its economy was based on the Soviet model. The economically backward communist China chose to sever its links with the capitalist world. It had little choice but to fall back on its own resources and, for a brief period, on Soviet aid and advice. The model was to create a state-owned heavy industries sector from the capital accumulated from agriculture. As it was short of foreign exchange that it needed in order to buy technology and goods on the world market, China decided to substitute imports by domestic This model allowed China to use its resources to establish the foundations of an industrial economy on a scale that did not exist before. Employment and social welfare was assured to all citizens, and China moved ahead of most developing countries in educating its citizens and ensuring better health for them. The economy also grew at a respectable rate of 5-6 per cent. But an annual growth of 2-3 per cent in population meant that economic growth was insufficient to meet the needs of a growing population. Agricultural production was not sufficient to The Rise of the Chinese Let us now turn to the third major alternative centre of power and our immediate neighbour, China. The cartoon on the following page sums up the current mood all over the world about the rise of China as an economic power. China s economic success since 1978 has been linked to its rise as a great power. China has been the fastest growing economy since the reforms first began there. It is projected to overtake the US as the world s largest economy by 2040. Its economic integration into the region makes it the driver of East Asian growth, thereby giving it enormous influence in Why did ASEAN SAARC did not? Leaders release postal stamps to commemorate silver jubilee of India and ASEAN partnership in New Delhi on 25 January 2018 Contemporary Centres of Power generate a surplus for industry. In Chapter 1, we discussed the crisis of the state controlled economy in the USSR. A similar crisis was to face China too: its industrial production was not growing fast enough, international trade was minimal and per capita income was very low. The Chinese leadership took major policy decisions in the 1970s. China ended its political and economic isolation with the establishment of relations with the United States in 1972. Premier Zhou Enlai proposed the  four modernisations  (agriculture, industry, science and technology and military) in 1973. By 1978, the then leader Deng Xiaoping announced the  open door  policy and economic reforms in China. The policy was to generate higher productivity by investments of capital and technology from China followed its own path in introducing a market economy. The Chinese did not go for  shock therapy  but opened their economy step by step. The privatisation of agriculture in 1982 was followed by Trade barriers were eliminated only in Special Economic Zones (SEZs) where foreign investors could set up enterprises. In China, the state played and continues to play a central role in setting up a The new economic policies helped the Chinese economy to break from stagnation. Privatisation of agriculture led to a remarkable rise in agricultural production and rural incomes. High personal savings in the rural economy lead to an exponential growth in rural industry. The Chinese economy, including both industry and agriculture, grew at a faster rate. The new trading laws and the creation of Special Economic Zones led to a phenomenal rise in foreign trade. China has become the most important destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) anywhere in the world. It has large foreign exchange reserves that now allow it to make big investment in other countries. China s accession to the A total of 6 SEZs in China and more than 200 approved SEZs in India! Is this good for The Great Wall and Dragon are two symbols most commonly associated with China. This cartoon uses both these to depict China s economic rise. Who do you think is the little man in this cartoon? Can he stop the dragon?   Deng Coy Miel, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics WTO in 2001 has been a further step in its opening to the outside world. The country plans to deepen its integration into the world economy and shape the future world economic order. While the Chinese economy has improved dramatically, not everyone in China has received the benefits of the reforms. Unemployment has risen in China with nearly 100 million people looking for jobs. Female employment and conditions of work are as bad as in Europe of the eighteenth and nineteenth degradation and corruption have increased besides a rise in economic inequality between rural and urban residents and coastal and inland provinces. However, regionally and globally, China has become an economic power to reckon with. The integration of China s economy and the inter-dependencies that this has created has enabled China to have considerable influence with its trade partners. Hence, its outstanding issues with Japan, the US, ASEAN, and Russia have been tempered by economic considerations. It hopes to resolve its differences with Taiwan, which it regards as a renegade province, by integrating it closely into its economy. Fears of China s rise have also been mitigated by its contributions to the stability of the ASEAN economies after the 1997 financial crisis. Its more outward looking investment and aid Like the opening images for this chapter, the first cartoon comments on the change in China s orientation. The second cartoon uses the symbol of the bicycle   China is the largest user of bicycles in the world   to comment on a duality in today s China. What is this duality? Can we call this a contradiction? China then and now   Mike Lane, Cagle Cartoons Inc.   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary Centres of Power policies in Latin America and Africa are increasingly projecting it as a global player on the side of India   China Relations India and China were great powers in Asia before the advent of Western imperialism. China had considerable influence and control on the periphery of its borders based on its unique tributary system. At different times in China s long history of dynastic rule, Mongolia, Korea, parts of Indo-China, and Tibet accepted China s authority. Various kingdoms and empires in India also extended their influence beyond their borders. In both cases this influence was political, economic and cultural. However, the regions where India and China exercised influence rarely ever overlapped. Thus, there was limited political and cultural interaction between the two. The result was that neither country was very familiar with the other. In the twentieth century, when both nations confronted each other, they had some difficulty evolving a foreign policy to deal with each other. After India regained its independence from Britain, and China expelled the foreign powers, there was hope that both would come together to shape the future of the developing world and of Asia particularly. For a brief while, the slogan of  Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai  was popular. However, Chinese aggression on the Indian border has marred that hope. Soon after independence, both states were involved in differences arising from the Chinese takeover of Tibet in 1950 and the final settlement of the Sino-Indian border. China and India were involved in a border conflict in 1962 over competing territorial claims principally in Arunachal Pradesh and in the Aksai Chin region of Ladakh. The conflict of 1962, in which India suffered military reverses, had long-term implications for India China relations. Diplomatic relations between the two countries were downgraded until 1976. Thereafter, relations between the two countries began to improve slowly. After the change in China s political leadership from the mid to late 1970s, China s policy became more pragmatic and less ideological. So it was prepared to put off the settlement of contentious issues while improving relations with India. A series of talks to resolve the border issue were also initiated in 1981. Since the end of the Cold War, there have been significant changes in India  China relations. Their relations now have a strategic as well as an Both view themselves as rising powers in global politics, and both would like to play Xi Jinping paid a visit to India in 2019. Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited China in 2018. Find out about the during their visits. Contemporary World Politics a major role in the Asian economy Rajiv Gandhi s visit to China in December 1988 provided the impetus for an improvement in India China relations. Since then both governments have taken measures to contain conflict and maintain  peace and tranquility  on the border. They have also signed agreements on cultural exchanges and cooperation in science and technology, and opened four border posts for trade. With  India  China trade growing at 30 per cent per year since 1999, a more positive perspective on relations with China has emerged. Bilateral trade between India and China has increased from $338 million in 1992 to more than $84 billion in 2017. More recently, both countries have agreed to cooperate with each other in areas that could otherwise create conflict between the two, such as bidding for energy deals abroad. At the global level, India and China have adopted similar policies in international economic institutions like the World Trade Organisation. India s nuclear tests in 1998, was justified on the grounds of a threat from China, did not stop greater interaction. It is true that China was seen as contributing to the build up of Pakistan s nuclear programme. China s military relations with Bangladesh and Myanmar were viewed as hostile to Indian interests in South Asia. However, none of these issues is likely to lead to conflict between the two. One sign of this is that the talks to resolve the boundary question have continued without interruption and military-to- military cooperation is increasing. Indian and Chinese leaders and officials visit Beijing and New Delhi with greater frequency, and both sides are now becoming more familiar with each other. Increasing transportation and communication links, common economic interests and global concerns should help establish a more positive  and sound relationship between the two  most populous countries of the world. Recently the relation between the two countries has taken a downslide. Border disputes, China-Pakistan economic corridor and China s support to Pakistan in UN against India s move to counter terrorism are some of the factors for it. Some people say Chinese products are going to flood our market? But where  	 Divide the classroom into three groups.  	 Assign each group one organisation to work on a fact file on the EU, ASEAN and SAARC.  	 Students have to prepare a fact file that contains information on the objectives, functions and recent activities of these organisations. Pictures of the conferences / summit meetings can be collected. Each group is to present its fact file before the class. Ideas for the Teacher The teacher is to focus on the functions of these organisations. Draw the attention of students to the achievements of regional   Link the role of regional economic organisations to the over all development of the member countries.   Sensitise students to the growing importance of regional economic organisations as an alternative approach to the peace and security of the world. Contemporary Centres of Power You might have heard about famous Japanese brands such as Sony, Panasonic, Canon, Suzuki, Honda, Toyota, Mazda. They have a reputation for making high-technology products. Japan has very few natural resources and imports most of its raw materials. Even then it progressed rapidly after the end of the Second World War. Japan became a member of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 1964. In 2017, it is the third largest economy in the world. It is the only Asian member of the G-7. It is the eleventh most populous nation in the world. Japan is the only nation that suffered the destruction caused by nuclear bombs. It is the second largest contributor to the regular budget of the UN, contributing almost 10 per cent of the total. Japan has a security alliance with the US since 1951. As per Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution,  the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes.  Although Japan s military expenditure is only one per cent of its GDP, it is the seventh largest in the world. Keeping all this in mind, do you think Japan can effectively function as an alternative centre of power? Also find out about major agreements signed during high-level bilateral visits between the two nations in the recent past. ASIMO, the world s most advanced humanoid robot, walking with a person while holding hand Credit: http://asimo.honda.com The Korean peninsula was divided into South Korea (Republic of Korea) and North Korea (Democratic People s Republic of Korea) at the end of the Second World War along the 38th Parallel. The Korean War during 1950-53 and dynamics of the Cold War era further intensified the rivalries between the two sides. Both the Koreas finally became Members of the UN on 17 September 1991. Meanwhile, South Korea emerged as a centre of power in Asia. Between the 1960s and the 1980s, it rapidly developed into an economic power, which is termed as  Miracle on the Han River. Signalling its all-round development, South Korea became a Member of the OECD in 1996. In 2017, its economy is the eleventh largest in the world and its military expenditure is the According to the Human Development Report 2016, the HDI rank of South Korea is 18. The major factors responsible for its high human development include  successful land reforms, rural development, extensive human resources development and rapid equitable economic growth.  Other factors are export orientation, strong redistribution policies, public infrastructure development, effective institutions and governance. The South Korean brands such as Samsung, LG and Hyundai have become renowned in India. Numerous agreements between India and South Korea signify their growing commercial and cultural ties. Find out about major agreements signed in the recent past. Skyline of Seoul city near the Han River Credit: http://english.seoul.go.kr Contemporary World Politics Arrange the following in chronological order. a. China s accession to WTO b. Establishment of the EEC c. Establishment of the EU d. Birth of ARF The  ASEAN Way  Reflects the life style of ASEAN members A form of interaction among ASEAN members that is informal The defence policy followed by the ASEAN members The road that connects all the ASEAN members Which of the following nations adopted an  open door  policy? b. South Korea Fill in the blanks: The border conflict between China and India in 1962 was principally over ______________ and __________________ region. ARF was established in the year ______________________. China entered into bilateral relations with __________ (a major country) in 1972. ________________ Plan influenced the establishment of the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation in 1948. ___________ is the organisation of ASEAN that deals with security. 5. 	 What are the objectives of establishing regional organisations? 6. 	 How does geographical proximity influence the formation of 7. 	 What are the components of the ASEAN Vision 2020? 8. 	 Name the pillars and the objectives of the ASEAN Community. 9. 	 In what ways does the present Chinese economy differs from its 10. 	 How did the European countries resolve their post-Second World War problem? Briefly outline the attempts that led to the formation of the European Union. 11. 	 What makes the European Union a highly influential regional 12. 	 The emerging economies of China and India have great potential to challenge the unipolar world. Do you agree with the statement? Substantiate your arguments. 13. 	 The Peace and prosperity of countries lay in the establishment and strengthening of regional economic organisations. Justify this 14. 	 Identify the contentious issues between China and India. How could these be resolved for greater cooperation? Give your suggestions. E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s Let us shift our gaze from the larger global developments in the post- Cold War era to developments in our own region, South Asia. When India and Pakistan joined the club of nuclear powers, this region suddenly became the focus of global attention. The focus was, of course, on the various kinds of conflict in this region: there are pending border and water sharing disputes between the states of the region. Besides, there are conflicts arising out of insurgency, ethnic strife and resource sharing. This makes the region very turbulent. At the same time, many people in South Asia recognise the fact that this region can develop and prosper if the states of the region cooperate with each other. In this chapter, we try to understand the nature of conflict and cooperation among different countries of the region. Since much of this is rooted in or conditioned by the domestic politics of these countries, we first introduce the region and the domestic politics of some of the big countries in the Contemporary South Asia Source: Subhas Rai s adaptation of   Liberty Leading the People, painted by Eugene Delacroix in 1830. Courtesy of Himal Southasian, (January 2007) The Southasia Trust, Nepal Contemporary World Politics What is South Asia? We are all familiar with the gripping tension during an India-Pakistan cricket match. We have also seen the goodwill and hospitality shown to visiting Indian and Pakistani fans by their hosts when they come to watch a cricket match. This is symbolic of the larger pattern of South Asian affairs. Ours is a region where rivalry and goodwill, hope and despair, mutual suspicion and Let us begin by asking an elementary question: what is South Asia? The expression  South Asia  usually includes the following countries: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The mighty Himalayas in the north and the vast Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal in the south, west and east respectively provide a natural insularity to the region, which is largely responsible for the linguistic, social and cultural distinctiveness of the sub- continent. The boundaries of the region are not as clear in the east and the west, as they are in the north and the south. Afghanistan and Myanmar are often included in discussions of the region as a whole. China is an important player but is not considered to be a part of the region. In this chapter, we shall use South Asia to mean the seven countries mentioned above. Thus defined, South Asia stands for diversity in every sense and yet constitutes one geo- The various countries in South Asia do not have the same kind of political systems. Despite many problems and limitations, Sri Lanka and India have successfully operated a democratic system since their independence from the British. You will study more about the evolution of democracy in India in the textbook that deals with politics in India since independence. It is, of course, possible to point out many limitations of India s democracy; but we have to remember the fact that India has remained a democracy throughout its existence as an independent country. The same is true of Sri Pakistan and Bangladesh h a v e  e x p e r i e n c e d  b o t h civilian and military rulers, with Bangladesh remaining a democracy in the post-Cold War period. Pakistan began the post- Cold War period with successive democratic governments under Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif respectively. But it suffered a military coup in 1999. It has been run by a civilian government again since 2008. Till 2006, Nepal was a constitutional monarchy with the danger of the king taking over executive powers. In 2008, the monarchy was abolished and Nepal emerged as a democratic republic. From the experience of Bangladesh and Nepal, we can say that democracy is becoming an accepted norm in the entire region of South Asia. all the South in West Asia or Is there a fixed definition of these Contemporary South Asia Similar changes are taking place in the two smallest countries of the region. Bhutan became a constitutional monarchy in 2008. Under the leadership of the king, it emerged as a multi-party democracy. The Maldives, the other island nation, was a Sultanate till 1968 when it was transformed into a republic with a presidential form of government. In June 2005, the parliament of the Maldives voted unanimously to introduce a multi-party system. The Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) dominates the political affairs of the island. The MDP won the 2018 Elections. Despite the mixed record of the democratic experience, the people in all these countries share the aspiration for democracy. A recent survey of the attitudes of the people in the five big countries of the region showed that there is widespread support for democracy in all these countries. Ordinary citizens, rich as well as poor and belonging to different religions, view the idea of democracy positively and support the institutions of representative democracy. They prefer democracy over any other form of government and think that democracy is suitable for their country. These are significant findings, for it was earlier believed that democracy could flourish and find support only in prosperous countries of the world. Both these graphs are based on interviews with more than 19,000 ordinary citizens in the five countries of South Asia. Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007 at birth (years) rate (% ages 15 and older) rate (per 1,000 Population living below income poverty line (%) PPP $1.90 a day Source:  United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report, 2018 Contemporary World Politics In that sense the South Asian experience of democracy has expanded the global imagination Let us look at the experience of democracy in each of the four big countries of the region other The Military and Democracy in Pakistan After Pakistan framed its first constitution, General Ayub Khan took over the administration of the country and soon got himself elected. He had to give up office when there was popular dissatisfaction against his rule. This gave way to a military takeover once again under General Yahya Khan. During Yahya s military rule, Pakistan faced the Bangladesh crisis, and after a war with India in 1971, East Pakistan broke away to emerge as an independent country called Bangladesh. After this, an elected government under the leadership of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto came to power in Pakistan from 1971 to 1977. The Bhutto government was removed by General Zia- ul-Haq in 1977. General Zia faced a pro-democracy movement from 1982 onwards and an elected democratic government was established once again in 1988 under the leadership of Benazir Bhutto. In the period that followed, Pakistani politics centred around the competition between her party, the Pakistan People s Party, and the Muslim TIMELINE OF SOUTH ASIA 1947: India and Pakistan emerge as independent nations after the end of British rule 1948: Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) gains independence; Indo-Pak conflict over Kashmir 1954-55: Pakistan joins the Cold War military blocs, SEATO 1960: India and Pakistan sign the Indus Waters Treaty 1962: Border conflict between India and China 1965: Indo-Pak War; UN India-Pakistan Observation Mission 1966: India and Pakistan sign the Tashkent Agreement; Six-point proposal of Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman for greater autonomy to East Pakistan 1971 March: Proclamation of Independence by leaders of August: Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship signed for 20 years December: Indo-Pak War, Liberation of Bangladesh 1972 July: India and Pakistan sign the Simla Agreement 1974 May: India conducts nuclear test 1976: Pakistan and Bangladesh establish diplomatic ties 1985 December: South Asian leaders sign the SAARC Charter at the first summit in Dhaka 1987: Indo-Sri Lanka Accord; Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) operation in Sri Lanka (1987-90) 1988: India sends troops to the Maldives to foil a coup attempt by mercenaries India and Pakistan sign the agreement not to attack nuclear installations and facilities of each other 1988-91:  Democracy restoration in Pakistan, Bangladesh 1996 December: India and Bangladesh sign the Farakka Treaty for sharing of the Ganga Waters 1998 May: India and Pakistan conduct nuclear tests December: India and Sri Lanka sign the Free Trade Agreement 1999 February: Indian PM Vajpayee undertakes bus journey to Lahore to sign a Peace Declaration June-July: Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan 2001 July: Vajpayee - Musharraf Agra Summit unsuccessful 2004 January: SAFTA signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in 2007: Afghanistan joins SAARC 2014 November: The 18th SAARC Summit in Kathmandu, Contemporary South Asia League. This phase of elective democracy lasted till 1999 when the army stepped in again and General Pervez Musharraf removed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. In 2001, General Musharraf got himself elected as the President. Pakistan continued to be ruled by the army, though the army rulers have held some elections to give their rule a democratic image. Since 2008, democratically elected leaders have been ruling Pakistan. S e v e r a l  f a c t o r s  h a v e contributed to Pakistan s failure in building a stable democracy. The social dominance of the military, clergy, and landowning aristocracy has led to the frequent overthrow of elected governments and the establishment of military government. Pakistan s conflict with India has made the pro- military groups more powerful. These groups have often said that political parties and democracy in Pakistan are flawed, that Pakistan s security would be harmed by selfish-minded parties and chaotic democracy, and that the army s stay in power is, therefore, justified. While democracy has not been fully successful in Pakistan, there has been a strong pro-democracy sentiment in the country. Pakistan has a courageous and relatively free press and a strong human T h e  l a c k  o f  g e n u i n e inter national support for democratic rule in Pakistan has further encouraged the military to continue its dominance. The United States and other Western countries have encouraged the military s authoritarian rule in the past, for their own reasons. Given their fear of the threat of what they call  global Islamic terrorism  and the apprehension that Pakistan s nuclear arsenal might fall into the hands of these terrorist groups, the military regime in Pakistan has been seen as the protector of Western interests in West Asia and South Asia. Democracy in Bangladesh Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan from 1947 to 1971. It consisted of the partitioned areas of Bengal and Assam from British India. The people of this region resented the domination of western Pakistan and the imposition of the Urdu language.  Soon after the partition, This cartoon comments on the dual role of Pakistan s ruler Pervez Musharraf as the President of the country and as the army General. Read the equations carefully and write down the message of this If Germany can be reunited, why can t the people of India and Pakistan at least travel more easily to each other s Surendra, The Hindu Contemporary World Politics they began protests against the unfair treatment meted out to the Bengali culture and language. They also demanded f a i r representation in administration and a fair share in political power. Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman led the popular struggle against West Pakistani domination. He demanded autonomy for the eastern region. In the 1970 elections in the then Pakistan, the Awami League led by Sheikh Mujib won all the seats in East Pakistan and secured a majority in the proposed constituent assembly for the whole of Pakistan. But the government dominated by the West Pakistani leadership refused to convene the assembly. Sheikh Mujib was arrested. Under the military rule of General Yahya Khan, the Pakistani army tried to suppress the mass movement of the Bengali people. Thousands were killed by the Pakistan army. This led to a large scale migration into India, creating a huge refugee problem for India. The government of India supported the demand of the people of East Pakistan for their independence and helped them financially and militarily. This resulted in a war between India and Pakistan in December 1971 that ended in the surrender of the Pakistani forces in East Pakistan and the formation of Bangladesh as an independent country. A mural in Dhaka University to remember Noor Hossain who was killed by the police during pro-democracy protests against General Ershad in 1987. Painted on his back:  Let Democracy be Freed. Photo credit: Shahidul Alam/ Drik Contemporary South Asia Bangladesh drafted its constitution declaring faith in secularism, democracy and socialism. However, in 1975 Sheikh Mujib got the constitution amended to shift from the parliamentary to presidential form of government. He also abolished all parties except his own, the Awami League. This led to conflicts and tensions. In a dramatic and tragic development, he was assassinated in a military uprising in August 1975. The new military ruler, Ziaur Rahman, formed his own Bangladesh National Party and won elections in 1979. He was assassinated and another military takeover followed under the leadership of Lt Gen H. M. Ershad. The people of Bangladesh soon rose in support of the demand for democracy. Students were in the forefront. Ershad was forced to allow political activity on a limited scale. He was later elected as President for five years. Mass public protests made Ershad step down in 1990. Elections were held in 1991. Since then representative democracy based on multi-party elections has been working in Bangladesh. Democracy in Nepal Nepal was a Hindu kingdom in the past and then a constitutional monarchy in the modern period for many years. Throughout this period, political parties and the common people of Nepal have wanted a more open and responsive system of government. But the king, with the help of the army, retained full control over the government and restricted the expansion of democracy in Nepal. The king accepted the demand for a new democratic constitution democracy movement. However, democratic governments had a short and troubled career. During the nineties, the Maoists of Nepal were successful in spreading their influence in many parts of Nepal. They believed in armed insurrection against the monarch and the ruling elite. This led to a violent conflict between the Maoist guerrillas and the armed forces of the king.  For some time, there was a triangular conflict among the monarchist forces, the democrats and the Maoists. In 2002, the king abolished the parliament and dismissed the government, thus ending even the limited democracy that existed in In April 2006, there were massive, country wide, pro- d e m o c r a c y  p r o t e s t s.  T h e struggling pro-democracy forces achieved their first major victory when the king was forced to restore the House of Representatives that had been dissolved in April 2002. The largely non-violent movement was led by the Seven Party Alliance (SPA), the Maoists and social activists. N e p a l   s  t r a n s i t i o n  t o democracy is almost complete. Nepal has undergone a unique moment in its history because it formed a constituent assembly to Can we make use of the idea Contemporary World Politics draft the constitution for Nepal. Some sections in Nepal thought that a nominal monarchy was necessary for Nepal to retain its link with the past. The Maoist groups agreed to suspend armed struggle. They wanted the constitution to include the radical programmes of social and economic restructuring. All the parties in the SPA did not agree with this programme. The Maoists and some other political groups were also deeply suspicious of the Indian government and its role in the future of Nepal. In 2008, Nepal became a democratic republic after abolishing the monarchy. In 2015, it adopted a Ethnic Conflict and Democracy in Sri Lanka We have already seen that Sri Lanka has retained democracy since its independence in 1948. But it faced a serious challenge, not from the military or monarchy but rather from ethnic conflict leading to the demand for secession by one of the regions. After its independence, politics in Sri Lanka (it was then known as Ceylon) was dominated by forces that represented the interest of the majority Sinhala community. They were hostile to a large number of Tamils who had migrated from India to Sri Lanka and settled there. This migration continued even after independence. The Sinhala nationalists thought that Sri Lanka should not give  concessions  to the Tamils because Sri Lanka belongs to the Sinhala people only.  The neglect of Tamil concerns led to militant Tamil nationalism. From 1983 onwards, the militant organisation, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam Nepal sounds really exciting. I wish I was Democracy activist, Durga Thapa, participating in a pro-democracy rally in Kathmandu in 1990. The second picture shows the same person in 2006, this time celebrating the success of the second Photo credit: Min Bajracharya Contemporary South Asia (LTTE) was fighting an armed struggle with the army of Sri Lanka in pursuit of their demand for a  Tamil Elam  or separate country for the Tamilians of Sri Lanka. At one point of time, the northeastern part of Sri Lanka was controlled The Sri Lankan problem involves people of Indian origin, and there was considerable pressure from the Tamil people in India to the effect that the Indian government should protect the interests of the Tamils in Sri Lanka. The government of India has from time to time tried to negotiate with the Sri Lankan government on the Tamil question. But in 1987, the government of India for the first time got directly involved in the Sri Lankan Tamil question. India signed an accord with Sri Lanka and sent troops to  stabilise relations between the Sri Lankan government and the Tamils. Eventually, the Indian Army got into a fight with the LTTE. The presence of Indian troops was also not liked much by the Sri Lankans. They saw this as an attempt by India to interfere in the internal affairs of Sri Lanka. In 1989, the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) pulled out of Sri Lanka without attaining The Sri Lankan crisis continued to be violent. However, international actors, particularly the Scandinavian countries such as Norway and Iceland tried to bring the warring groups back to negotiations. Finally, the armed conflict came to an end, as the LTTE was vanquished in 2009. In spite of the conflict, Sri Lanka has registered considerable economic growth and recorded high levels of human development. Sri Lanka was one of the first developing countries to successfully control the rate of growth of population, the first country in the region to liberalise the economy, and it has had the highest per capita gross domestic product (GDP) for many years right through the civil war. Despite the ravages of internal conflict, it has maintained a democratic political system. Let us now move from domestic politics and take a look at some of the areas of conflict in the inter- national relations in this region. The post-Cold War era has not meant the end of conflicts and The cartoon depicts the dilemma of the Sri Lankan leadership in trying to balance Sinhala hardliners or the Lion and Tamil militants or the Tiger while negotiating peace. Keshav, The Hindu Contemporary World Politics tensions in this region. We have already noted the conflicts around internal democracy or ethnic differences. But there are also some very crucial conflicts of an international nature. Given the position of India in this region, most of these conflicts involve The most salient and over- whelming of these conflicts is, of course, the one between India and Pakistan. Soon after the partition, the two countries got embroiled in a conflict over the fate of Kashmir. The Pakistani government claimed that Kashmir belonged to it. Wars between India and Pakistan in 1947-48 and 1965 failed to settle the matter. The 1947-48 war resulted in the division of the province into Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and the Indian province of Jammu and Kashmir divided by the Line of Control. In 1971, India won a decisive war against Pakistan but the Kashmir issue India s conflict with Pakistan is also over strategic issues like the control of the Siachen glacier and over acquisition of arms. The arms race between the two countries assumed a new character with both states acquiring nuclear weapons and missiles to deliver such arms against each other in the 1990s. In 1998, India conducted nuclear explosion in Pokhran. Pakistan responded within a few days by carrying out nuclear tests in the Chagai Hills. Since then India and Pakistan seem to have built a military relationship in which the possibility of a direct and full- scale war has declined. But both the governments continue to be suspicious of each other. The Indian government has blamed the Pakistan government for using a strategy of low-key violence by helping the Kashmiri militants with arms, training, money and protection to carry out terrorist strikes against India. The Indian government also believes that Pakistan had aided the pro- Khalistani militants with arms and ammunitions during the period 1985-1995. Its spy agency, Inter Services Intelligence (ISI), is alleged to be involved in various anti-India campaigns in India s northeast, operating secretly through Bangladesh and Nepal. Discussion on Kashmir sounds like a property dispute between the rulers of India and Pakistan! What do the Kashmiris feel about it? A view of the current phase of the  Indo-Pak negotiations. Keshav, The Hindu Contemporary South Asia The government of Pakistan, in turn, blames the Indian government and its security agencies for fomenting trouble in the provinces of Sindh and India and Pakistan also have had problems over the sharing of river waters. Until 1960, they were locked in a fierce argument over the use of the rivers of the Indus basin. Eventually, in 1960, with the help of the World Bank, India and Pakistan signed the Indus Waters Treaty which has survived to this day in spite of various military conflicts in which the two countries have been involved. There are still some minor differences about the interpretation of the Indus Waters Treaty and the use of the river waters. The two countries are not in agreement over the demarcation line in Sir Creek in the Rann of Kutch.  The dispute seems minor, but there is an underlying worry that how the dispute is settled may have an impact on the control of sea resources in the area adjoining Sir Creek. India and Pakistan are holding negotiations on all India and its Other The governments of India and Bangladesh have had differences over several issues including the sharing of the Ganga and Brahmaputra river waters. The Indian government has been unhappy with Bangladesh s denial of illegal immigration to India, its support for anti-Indian Islamic fundamentalist groups, Bangladesh s refusal to allow Indian troops to move through its territory to northeastern India, and its decision not to export natural gas to India or allow Myanmar to do so through Bangladeshi territory. Bangladeshi governments have felt that the Indian government behaves like a regional bully over the sharing of river waters, encouraging rebellion in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, trying to extract its natural gas and being unfair in trade. The two countries could not resolve their boundary dispute for a long while. Despite their differences, India and Bangladesh do cooperate on many issues. Economic relations have improved considerably in the last 20 years. Bangladesh is a part of India s Look East (Act East since 2014) policy that wants to link up with Southeast Asia via Myanmar. On disaster management and environmental issues, the two states have cooperated regularly. In 2015, they exchanged certain enclaves. Efforts are on to broaden the areas of cooperation further by identifying common threats and being more sensitive to each Nepal and India enjoy a very special relationship that has very few parallels in the world. A treaty between the two countries allows the citizens of the two countries to travel to and work in the other country without visas and Why is it that every one of our neighbours has a problem with India? Is there something wrong with our foreign policy? Or is it just our size? Contemporary World Politics passports. Despite this special relationship, the governments of the two countries have had trade-related disputes in the past. The Indian government has often expressed displeasure at the warm relationship between Nepal and China and at the Nepal government s inaction against anti-Indian elements. Indian security agencies see the Maoist movement in Nepal as a growing security threat, given the rise of Naxalite groups in various Indian states from Bihar in the north to Andhra Pradesh in the south. Many leaders and citizens in Nepal think that the Indian government interferes in its internal affairs, has designs on its river waters and hydro- electricity, and prevents Nepal, a landlocked country, from getting easier access to the sea through Indian territory. Nevertheless, Indo-Nepal relations are fairly stable and peaceful. Despite differences, trade, scientific cooperation, common natural resources, electricity generation a n d  i n t e r l o c k i n g  w a t e r management grids hold the two countries together. There is a hope that the consolidation of democracy in Nepal will lead to improvements in the ties between the two countries. The dif ficulties in the r elationship between the are mostly over ethnic conflict in the island nation. Indian leaders and citizens find it impossible to remain neutral when Tamils are politically unhappy and are being killed. After the military intervention in 1987, the Indian  	 Divide the classroom into eight groups (as many as the number of countries).  The number of students in each group may vary, reflecting the size of the countries of South Asia.  	 Name each group after a country and hand over a brief country profile to respective groups.  Besides the basic information, include a short note on the contentious issues/disputes  among the South Asian countries. The issues could be those discussed in this chapter or an issue of relevance but not discussed in the chapter.  	 Allow students to select an issue of their choice. The dispute could be bilateral or multilateral (the issue could be related to India, given the geographic peculiarity of the region). Assign each group to find out what initiatives the governments involved have taken and the reasons for their failures in resolving the disputes. Students should assume the role of representing their respective countries and share their findings. Ideas for the Teacher Pair up the countries sharing the common issue/dispute. It could be two groups in the case of a bilateral issue or more in case of a multilateral issue (examples of bilateral issues include the Jammu and Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, the migrant problem between India and Bangladesh; multilateral issues include the creation of a free trade zone or tackling Groups should negotiate on the proposals and counter- proposals within a time limit. The teacher is to take note of the outcome of the negotiations. The focus should be on the areas of agreement and disagreement.   Link the outcome of the negotiations with the prevailing situation among the countries of South Asia. Talk about the difficulties involved in negotiating on a political issue based on the observation made. Conclude by discussing the importance of accommodating each other s interest for the sake of peaceful Contemporary South Asia government now prefers a policy of disengagement vis- -vis Sri Lanka s  internal troubles. India signed a free trade agreement with Sri Lanka, which strengthened relations between two countries. India s help in post-tsunami reconstruction in Sri Lanka has also brought the two countries closer. India enjoys a very special relationship with Bhutan too and does not have any major conflict with the Bhutanese government. The ef forts made by the Bhutanese monarch to weed out the guerrillas and militants from northeastern India that operate in his country have been helpful to India. India is involved in big hydroelectric projects in Bhutan and remains the Himalayan kingdom s biggest source of development aid. India s ties with the Maldives remain warm and cordial. In November 1988, when some Tamil mercenaries from Sri Lanka attacked the Maldives, the Indian air force and navy reacted quickly to the Maldives  request to help stop the invasion. India has also contributed towards the island s economic development, tourism and fisheries. You may have noticed that India has various problems with its smaller neighbours in the region. Given its size and power, they are bound to be suspicious of India s intentions. The Indian government, on the other hand, often feels exploited by its neighbours. It does not like the political instability in these countries, fearing it can help outside powers to gain influence in the region. The smaller countries fear that India wants to be a Not all conflicts in South Asia are between India and its neighbours. Nepal and Bhutan, as well as Bangladesh and Myanmar, have had disagreements in the past over the migration of ethnic Nepalese into Bhutan and the Rohingyas from Myanmar into India and Bangladesh, respectively. Bangladesh and Nepal have had some differences over the future of the Himalayan river waters. The major conflicts and differences, though, are between India and the others, partly because of the geography of the region, in which India is located centrally and is therefore the only country that borders the If the chapter, on US was called  US is this chapter not What does this cartoon tell you about the role of India and Pakistan in the process of regional cooperation in South Asia? Surendra, The Hindu Contemporary World Politics Peace and Cooperation Do the states of South Asia cooperate with each other? Or do they only keep fighting with each other? In spite of the many conflicts, the states of South Asia recognise the importance of cooperation and friendly relationship, among themselves. The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is a major regional initiative by the South Asian states to evolve cooperation through multilateral means. It began in 1985. Unfortunately, due to persisting political differences, SAARC has not had much success. SAARC members signed the South Asian Free Trade (SAFTA) agreement which promised the formation of a free trade zone for the whole of South Asia. A new chapter of peace and cooperation might evolve in South Asia if all the countries in the region allow free trade across the borders. This is the spirit behind the idea of SAFTA. The Agreement was signed in 2004 and came into effect on 1 January 2006. SAFTA aims at lowering trade tariffs. But some of our neighbours fear that SAFTA is a way for India to  invade  their markets and to influence their societies and politics through commercial ventures and a commercial presence in their countries. India thinks that there are real economic benefits for all from SAFTA and that a region that trades more freely will be able to cooperate better on political issues. Some in India think that SAFTA is not worth the trouble since India already has bilateral agreements with Bhutan, Nepal and Although India-Pakistan relations seem to be a story of endemic conflict and violence, there have been a series of efforts to manage tensions and build peace. The two countries have agreed to undertake confidence building measures to reduce the risk of war. Social activists and prominent personalities have collaborated to create an atmosphere of friendship among the people of both countries. Leaders have met at summits to understand each other better and to find solutions seems to have emerged for trade! Is trade more The two cartoons, one from India and the other from Pakistan, interpret the role of two key players who are also interested in the region. Do you notice any commonality between their Keshav, The Hindu Contemporary South Asia to the major problems between the two neighbours. A number of bus routes have been opened up between the two countries. Trade between India and Pakistan had increased and Visas had been more easily granted. However, in recent times, the situation has No region exists in a vacuum. It is influenced by outside powers and events no matter how much it may try to insulate itself from non-regional powers. China and the United States remain key players in South Asian politics. Sino-Indian relations have improved significantly in the last ten years, but China s strategic partnership with Pakistan remains a major irritant. The demands of development and globalisation have brought the two Asian giants closer, and their economic ties have multiplied rapidly since 1991. American involvement in South Asia has rapidly increased after the Cold War. The US has had good relations with both India and Pakistan since the end of the Cold War and increasingly works as a moderator in India-Pakistan relations. Economic reforms and liberal economic policies in both countries have greatly increased the depth of American participation in the region. The large South Asian diasporas in the US and the huge size of the population and markets of the region also give America an added stake in the future of regional security and peace. However, whether South Asia will continue to be known as a conflict prone zone or will evolve into a regional bloc with some common cultural features and trade interests will depend more on the people and the governments of the region than any other outside power. Identify the country: The struggle among pro-monarchy, pro-democracy groups and extremists created an atmosphere of political instability: A landlocked country with multi-party competition: The first country to liberalise its economy in the South Asian In the conflict between the military and pro-democracy groups, the military has prevailed over democracy: Centrally located and shares borders with most of the South Earlier the island had the Sultan as the head of state. Now, it s Small savings and credit cooperatives in the rural areas have helped in reducing poverty: A landlocked country with a monarchy: Contemporary World Politics E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s 2. 	 Which among the following statements about South Asia is wrong? All the countries in South Asia are democratic. Bangladesh and India have signed an agreement on river-water SAFTA was signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in Islamabad. The US and China play an influential role in South Asian politics. 3. 	 What are some of the commonalities and differences between Bangladesh and Pakistan in their democratic experiences? 4. 	 List three challenges to democracy in Nepal. 5. 	 Name the principal players in the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka. How do you assess the prospects of the resolution of this conflict? 6. 	 Mention some of the recent agreements between India and Pakistan. Can we be sure that the two countries are well on their way to a 7. 	 Mention two areas each of cooperation and disagreement between India and Bangladesh. 8. 	 How are the external powers influencing bilateral relations in South Asia? Take any one example to illustrate your point. 9. 	 Write a short note on the role and the limitations of SAARC as a forum for facilitating economic cooperation among the South Asian 10. 	 India s neighbours often think that the Indian government tries to dominate and interfere in the domestic affairs of the smaller countries of the region. Is this a correct impression? In this chapter we shall discuss the role of international organisations after the collapse of the Soviet Union. We shall examine how, in this emerging world, there were calls for the restructuring of international organisations to cope with various new challenges including the rise of US power. The potential reform of the United Nations Security Council is an interesting case of the reform process and its difficulties. We then turn to India s involvement in the UN and its view of Security Council reforms. The chapter closes by asking if the UN can play any role in dealing with a world dominated by one superpower. In this chapter we also look at some other trans-national organisations that are playing a This is the United Nations  logo. The emblem has a world map with olive branches around it, signifying world peace. Credit: www.un.org Contemporary World Politics Read the two cartoons on this page. Both the cartoons comment on the ineffectiveness of the United Nations Organisation, usually referred to as the UN, in the Lebanon crisis in 2006. Both the cartoons represent the kind of opinions that we often hear about On the other hand, we also find that the UN is generally regarded as the most important international organisation in today s world. In the eyes of many people all over the world, it is indispensable and represents the great hope of humanity for peace and progress. Why do we then need organisations like the UN? Let us hear two insiders:  The United Nations was not created to take humanity to heaven, but to save it from hell.    Dag Hammarskjold, the UN s  Talking shop? Yes, there are a lot of speeches and meetings at the U.N., especially during the annual sessions of the General Assembly. But as Churchill put it, jaw-jaw is better than war-war. Isn t it better to have one place where all  countries in the world can get together, bore each other sometimes with their words rather than bore holes into each other on the battlefield?    Shashi Tharoor, the former UN Under-Secretary- General for Communications and These two quotes suggest s o m e t h i n g  i m p o r t a n t. International organisations are not the answer to everything, but they are important. International organisations help with matters of war and peace. They also help countries cooperate to make better living conditions for us all. Countries have conflicts and differences with each other. That does not necessarily mean they must go to war to deal with their That s what they say about the parliament too   a talking shop. Does it mean that we need During June 2006, Israel attacked Lebanon, saying that it was necessary to control the militant group called Hezbollah. Large numbers of civilians were killed and many public buildings and even residential areas came under Israeli bombardment. The UN passed a resolution on this only in August and the Israel army withdrew from the region only in October. Both these cartoons comment on the role of the UN and its Secretary-General in this episode.   Harry Harrison, Cagle Cartoons Inc.   Petar Pismestrovic, Cagle Cartoons Inc. antagonisms. They can, instead, discuss contentious issues and find peaceful solutions; indeed, even though this is rarely noticed, most conflicts and differences are resolved without going to war. The role of an international organisation can be important in this context. An international organisation is not a super-state with authority over its members. It is created by and responds to states. It comes into being when states agree to its creation. Once created, it can help member states resolve their problems peacefully. are helpful in another way. Nations can usually see that there are some things they must do together. There are issues that are so challenging that they can only be dealt with when everyone works together. Disease is an example. Some diseases can only be eradicated if everyone in the world cooperates in inoculating or vaccinating their populations. Or take global warming and its effects. As temperatures rise because of the increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, there is a danger that sea levels will also rise, thereby submerging many coastal areas of the world including huge cities. Of course, each country can try to find its own solution to the effects of global warming. But in the end a more effective approach is to stop the warming itself. This requires at least all of the major industrial powers to cooperate. the need for cooperation and actually cooperating are two different things. Nations can recognise the need to cooperate but cannot always agree on how best to do so, how to share the costs of cooperating, how to make sure that the benefits of cooperating are justly divided, and how to ensure that others do not break their end of the bargain and cheat on an agreement. An international organisation can ideas about how to cooperate. It  can  provide  mechanisms, rules  and  a  bureaucracy, to help members have more confidence that costs will be shared properly, that the benefits Make a list of issues or problems (other than the ones mentioned in the text) that cannot be handled by any one country and require an The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an international organisation that oversees those financial institutions and regula- tions that act at the international level. The IMF has 190 member they do not enjoy an equal say. The G-7 members US (16.52%), Japan (6.15%), Germany (5.32%), France (4.03%), UK (4.03%), Italy (3.02%) and Canada (2.22%) have 41.29% of the votes. China (6.09%), India (2.64%), Russia (2.59%) Brazil (2.22%) and Saudi Arabia (2.02%) are the other major members. Contemporary World Politics will be fairly divided, and that once a member joins an agreement it will honour the terms and conditions of the agreement. With the end of the Cold War, we can see that the UN may have a slightly different role. As the United States and its allies emerged victorious, there was concern amongst many governments and peoples that the Western countries led by the US would be so powerful that there would be no check against their wishes and desires. Can the UN serve to promote dialogue and discussion with the US in particular, and could it limit the power of the American government? We shall try to answer this question at the end of the chapter. Evolution of the UN The First World War encouraged the world to invest in an international organisation to deal with conflict. Many believed that such an organisation would help the world to avoid war. As a result, the League of Nations was born. However, despite its initial success, it could not prevent the Second World War (1939-45). Many more people died and were wounded in this war than ever The UN was founded as a successor to the League of Nations. It was established in 1945 immediately after the S e c o n d  Wo r l d  Wa r.  T h e 1941 August: Signing of the Atlantic Charter by the US President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British PM Winston S. 1942 January: 26 Allied nations fighting against the Axis Powers meet in Washington, D.C., to support the Atlantic Charter and sign the  Declaration by United Nations  1943 December: Tehran Conference Declaration of the Three Powers (US, Britain and Soviet Union) 1945 February: Yalta Conference of the  Big Three  (Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin) decides to organise a United Nations conference on the proposed world organisation April-May: The 2-month long United Nations Conference on International Organisation at San Francisco 1945 June 26: Signing of the UN Charter by 50 nations (Poland signed on October 15; so the UN has 51 original founding 1945 October 24: the UN was founded (hence October 24 is celebrated as UN Day) 1945 October 30: India joins the UN The US Office of War Information created the above poster during the Second World War as per the Declaration by United Nations of 1942. The poster features the flags of all nations that were part of the Allied Forces. It reflects the belligerent origins of the UN. FOUNDING OF THE UNITED NATIONS Adapted from http://www.newint.org/issue375/pics/un-map-big.gif For more details about the UN System, visit www.un.org Contemporary World Politics organisation was set up through the signing of the United Nations Charter by 51 states. It tried to achieve what the League could not between the two world wars. The UN s objective is to prevent international conflict and to facilitate cooperation among states. It was founded with the hope that it would act to stop the conflicts between states escalating into war and, if war broke out, to limit the extent of hostilities. Furthermore, since conflicts often arose from the lack of social and economic development, the UN was intended to bring countries together to improve the prospects of social and economic development all over the world. By 2011, the UN had 193 member states. These includeed almost all independent states. In the UN General Assembly, all members have one vote each. In the UN Security Council, there are five permanent members. These are: the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, France and China. These states were selected as permanent members as they were the most powerful immediately after the Second World War and because they constituted the victors in The UN s most visible public figure, and the representative head, is the Secretary-General. The present Secretary-General is Ant nio Guterres. He is the ninth Secretary-General of the UN. He took over as the Secretary- General on 1 January 2017. He was the Prime Minister of Portugal (1995-2002) and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees The UN consists of many d i f f e r e n t  s t r u c t u r e s  a n d agencies. War and peace and differences between member states are discussed in the General Assembly as well as the Security Council. Social and economic issues are dealt with by many agencies including the World Health Organisation (WHO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Human Rights Commision (UNHRC), the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), the United N a t i o n s  C h i l d r e n   s  F u n d (UNICEF), and the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), Reform of the UN after the Cold War Reform and improvement are fundamental to any organisation to serve the needs of a changing environment. The UN is no exception. In recent years, there have been demands for reform of the world body. However, there is little clarity and consensus on the nature of reform. Two basic kinds of reforms face the UN: reform of the organisation s structures and processes; and a review of the issues that fall within the jurisdiction of the organisation. Almost everyone is agreed that both aspects of reform are Cold War or no Cold War, one reform is needed above all. Only should be allowed to represent their countries in the UN. How can they allow dictators to speak in the name of the people of their Search for at least one news of each of the necessary. What they cannot agree on is precisely what is to be done, how it is to be done, and when it is to be done. On the reform of structures and processes, the biggest discussion has been on the functioning of the Security Council. Related to this has been the demand for an increase in the UN Security Council s permament and non-permanent membership so that the realities of contemporary world politics are better reflected in the structure of the organisation. In particular, there are proposals to increase membership from Asia, Africa and South America.  Beyond this, the US and other Western countries want improvements in the UN s budgetary procedures and its On the issues to be given greater priority or to be brought within the jurisdiciton of the UN, some countries and experts want the organisation to play a greater or more effective role in peace and security missions, while others want its role to be confined to development and humanitarian w o r k  ( h e a l t h,  e d u c a t i o n, environment, population control, human rights, gender and social Let us look at both sets of reforms, with an emphasis on reform of the structures and The UN was established in 1945 immediately after the Second World War. The way it Trygve Lie (1946-1952) Norway; lawyer and foreign minister; worked for ceasefire between India and Pakistan on Kashmir; criticised for his failure to quickly end the Korean war; Soviet Union opposed second term for him; resigned from the post. Dag Hammarskj ld (1953-1961) Sweden; Economist and lawyer; worked for resolving the Suez Canal dispute and the decolonisation of Africa; awarded Nobel Peace Prize posthumously in 1961 for his efforts to settle the Congo crisis; Soviet Union and France criticised his role in Africa. U Thant (1961-1971) Burma (Myanmar); teacher and diplomat; worked for resolving the Cuban Missile Crisis and ending the Congo crisis; established the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; criticised the US during the Vietnam War. Kurt Waldheim (1972-1981) Austria; diplomat and foreign minister; made efforts to resolve the problems of Namibia and Lebanon; oversaw the relief operation in Bangladesh; China blocked his bid for a third term. Javier Perez de Cuellar (1982-1991) Peru; lawyer and diplomat; worked for peace in Cyprus, Afghanistan and El Salvador; mediated between Britain and Argentina after the Falklands War; negotiated for the independence of Namibia. Boutros Boutros-Ghali (1992-1996) Egypt; diplomat, jurist, foreign minister; issued a report, An Agenda for Peace; conducted a successful UN operation in Mozambique; blamed for the UN failures in Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda; due to serious disagreements, the US blocked a second term for him. Kofi A. Annan (1997-2006) Ghana; UN official; created the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; declared the US-led invasion of Iraq as an illegal act; established the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights Council in 2005; awarded the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize. Ban Ki-moon (2007-2016) Republic of Korea (South Korea); diplomat and foreign minister; the second Asian to hold the post; highlighted climate change; focused on the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals; worked for the creation of UN Women; emphasised conflict resolution and nuclear disarmament. Ant nio Manuel de Oliveira Guterres (2017-   ) Portugal; former Prime Minister of Portugal from 1995 to 2002; was the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees during 2005 2015; President of the Socialist International from 1999 to 2005. He is serving as the ninth Secretary General of the United Nations. Photo Credit: www.un.org Contemporary World Politics was organised and the way it functioned reflected the realities of world politics after the Second World War. After the Cold War, those realities are different. Here are some of the changes that have T h e  S o v i e t  U n i o n  h a s The US is the strongest power. The relationship between Russia, the successor to the Soviet Union, and the US is much more cooperative. China is fast emerging as a great power, and India also is The economies of Asia are growing at an unprecedented Many new countries have joined the UN (as they became independent from the Soviet Union or former communist states in eastern Europe). A whole new set of challenges confronts the world (genocide, civil war, ethnic conflict, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, climate change, environmental In this situation, in 1989, as the Cold War was ending, the question facing the world was: is the UN doing enough? Is it equipped to do what is required? What should it be doing? And how? What reforms are necessary to make it work better? For the past decade and a half, member states have been trying to find satisfactory and practical answers to these questions. Reform of Structures and While the case for reform has widespread support, getting agreement on what to do is difficult. Let us examine the debate over reform of the UN Security Council. In 1992, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution. The resolution reflected three main complaints: The Security Council no longer Its decisions reflect only Western values and interests and are dominated by a few In view of these growing demands for the restructuring of the UN, on 1 January 1997, the UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan initiated an inquiry into how the Ban Ki-moon, UN Secretary-General, launches UN @ 70 to celebrate the 70th Anniversary in New Delhi in 2015     (UN Photo/Mark Garten) UN should be reformed. How, for instance, should new Security Council members be chosen? In the years since then, the following are just some of the criteria that have been proposed for new permanent and non- permanent members of the Security Council. A new member, it has been suggested, should be: A major economic power A major military power A substantial contributor to the UN budget A big nation in terms of its A nation that respects democracy and human rights A  c o u n t r y  t h a t  w o u l d make the Council more representative of the world s diversity in terms of geography, economic systems, and culture Clearly, each of these criteria has some validity. Governments saw advantages in some criteria and disadvantages in others depending on their interests and aspirations. Even if they had no desire to be members themselves, countries could see that the criteria were problematic. How big an economic or military power did you have to be to qualify for Security Council membership? What level of budget contribution would enable a state to buy its way into the Council? Was a big population an asset or a liability for a country trying to play a bigger role in the world? If respect for democracy and human rights was the criteria, countries with excellent records would be in line to be members; but would they be effective as Council members? The World Bank was created during the Second World War in 1944. Its activities are focused on the developing countries. It works for human development (education, health), agriculture and rural development (irrigation, rural services), environmental protection (pollution reduction, establishing and enforcing regulations), infrastructure (roads, urban regeneration, electricity) and governance (anti-corruption, development of legal institutions). It provides loans and grants to the member-countries. In this way, it exercises enormous influence on the economic policies of developing countries. It is often criticised for setting the economic agenda of the poorer nations, attaching stringent conditions to its loans and forcing free Major contributors to the UN regular budget for 2019 Republic of Korea Contemporary World Politics Furthermore, how was the matter of representation to be resolved? Did equitable representation in geographical terms mean that there should be one seat each from Asia, Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean? Should the representation, on the other hand, be by regions or sub- regions (rather than continents)? Why should the issue of equitable representation be decided by geography? Why not by levels of economic development? Why not, in other words, give more seats to members of the developing world? Even here, there are difficulties. The developing world consists of countries at many different levels of development. What about culture? Should different cultures or  civilisations  be given representation in a more balanced way? How does one divide the world by civilisations or cultures given that nations have so many cultural streams within A related issue was to change the nature of membership altogether. Some insisted, for instance, that the veto power of the five permanent members be abolished. Many perceived the veto to be in conflict with the concept of democracy and sovereign equality in the UN and thought that the veto was no longer right or relevant. In the Security Council, there are five permanent members and ten non-permanent members. The Charter gave the permanent members a privileged position to bring about stability in the world after the Second World War. The main privileges of the five permanent members are permanency and the veto power. The non-permanent members serve for only two years at a time and give way after that period to newly elected members. A country cannot be re-elected immediately after completing a term of two years. The non- permanent members are elected in a manner so that they represent all continents of the world.  	 Divide the class into six groups. Each group is to follow one of the six criteria (or more if there are more suggestions) listed here for permanent membership of the UN Security Council.  	 Each group is to make its own list of the permanent members based on its given criterion (e.g. the group working on the  population  criterion will find out the which are five most  	 Each group can make a presentation of their recommended list and reasons why their criterion should be accepted. Ideas for the Teacher Allow the students to opt for the group whose criterion they Compare all the lists and see how many names are common and how often India features. Keep some time for an open ended discussion on which criterion should be adopted. Most importantly, the non- permanent members do not have the veto power. What is the veto power? In taking decisions, the Security Council proceeds by voting. All members have one vote. However, the permanent members can vote in a negative manner so that even if all other permanent and non-permanent members vote for a particular decision, any permanent member s negative vote can stall the decision. This negative vote is the veto. While there has been a move to abolish or modify the veto system, there is also a realisation that the permanent members are unlikely to agree to such a reform. Also, the world may not be ready for such a radical step even though the Cold War is over. Without the veto, there is the danger as in 1945 that the great powers would lose interest in the world body, that they would do what they pleased outside it, and that without their support and involvement the body would be ineffective. That s very unfair!  It s actually the weaker countries who need a veto, not those who already have so Jurisdiction of the UN The question of membership is a serious one. In addition, though, there are more substantial issues before the world. As the UN completed 60 years of its existence, the heads of all the member-states met in September 2005 to celebrate the anniversary and review the situation. The leaders in this meeting decided that the following steps should be taken to make the UN more relevant in the changing context. Creation of a Peacebuilding of the international community in case of failures of national governments to protect their own citizens from atrocities Establishment of a Human Rights Council (operational since 19 June 2006) Agreements to achieve the Condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations Creation of a Democracy Fund An agreement to wind up the It is not hard to see that these are equally contentious issues for the UN. What should a Peacebuilding Commission do? There are any number of conflicts all over the world. Which ones should it intervene in? Is it possible or even desirable for it to intervene in Contemporary World Politics each and every conflict? Similarly, what is the responsibility of the international community in dealing with atrocities? What are human rights and who should determine the level of human rights violations and the course of action to be taken when they are violated? Given that so many countries are still part of the developing world, how realistic is it for the UN to achieve an ambitious set of goals such as those listed in the Sustainable Development Goals? Can there be agreement on a definition of terrorism? How shall the UN use funds to promote democracy? And so on. The humanitarian crisis in Darfur, Sudan since 2003 has attracted empty promises by the International Community. How do you think the UN can intervene in situations like this? Would that require a change in its jurisdiction?   Pat Bagley, Cagle Cartoons Inc. India and the UN Reforms India has supported the restructuring of the UN on several grounds. It believes that a strengthened and revitalised UN is desirable in a changing world. India also supports an enhanced role for the UN in promoting development and cooperation among states. India believes that development should be central to the UN s agenda as it is a vital precondition for the maintenance of international peace and security. One of India s major concerns has been the composition of the Security Council, which has remained largely static while the UN General Assembly member- ship has expanded considerably. India considers that this has harmed the representative character of the Security Council. It also argues that an expanded Council, with more representation, will enjoy greater support in the world community. We should keep in mind that the membership of the UN Security Council was expanded from 11 to 15 in 1965. But, there was no change in the number of permanent members. Since then, the size of the Council has remained stationary. The fact remains that the overwhelming majority of the UN General Assembly members now are developing countries. Therefore, India argues that they should also have a role in shaping the decisions in the Security Council which affect them. India supports an increase in the number of both permanent and non-permanent members. Its representatives have argued that the activities of the Security Council have greatly expanded in the past few years. The success of the Security Council s actions depends upon the political support of the international community. Any plan for restructuring of the Security Council should, therefore, be broad-based. For example, the Security Council should have more developing countries in it. Not surprisingly, India itself also wishes to be a permanent member in a restructured UN. India is the most populous country in the world comprising almost one-fifth of the world population. Moreover, India is also the world s largest democracy. India has participated in virtually all of the initiatives of the UN. Its role in the UN s The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is an international organisation which sets the rules for global trade. This organisation was set up in 1995 as the successor to the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) created after the Second World War. It has 164 members (as on 29 July 2016). All decisions are taken unanimously but the major economic powers such as the US, EU and Japan have managed to use the WTO to frame rules of trade to advance their own interests. The developing countries often complain of non-transparent procedures and being pushed around by big powers. Do we want to oppose the bossism of the big five or do we want to join them and become Contemporary World Politics peacekeeping efforts is a long and substantial one. The country s economic emergence on the world stage is another factor that perhaps justifies India s claim to a permanent seat in the Security Council. India has also made regular financial contributions to the UN and never faltered on its payments. India is aware that permanent membership of the Security Council also has symbolic importance. It signifies a country s growing importance in world affairs. This greater status is an advantage to a country in the conduct of its foreign policy: the reputation for being powerful makes you more influential. Despite India s wish to be a permanent veto-wielding member of the UN, some countries question its inclusion. Neighbouring Pakistan, with which India has troubled relations, is not the only country that is reluctant to see India become a permanent veto member of the Security Council. Some countries, for instance, are concerned about India s nuclear weapons capabilities. Others think that its difficulties with Pakistan will make India ineffective as a permanent member. Yet others feel that if India is included, then other emerging powers will have to be accommodated such as Brazil, Germany, Japan, perhaps even South Africa, whom they oppose. There are those who feel that Africa and South America must be represented in any expansion of the permanent membership since those are the only continents not to have representation in the present structure.  Given these concerns, it may not be very easy for India or anyone else to become a permanent member of the UN in the near future. The UN in a Unipolar Among the concerns about the reform and restructuring of the UN has been the hope of some countries that changes could help the UN cope better with a unipolar word in which the US was the most powerful country without any serious rivals. Can the UN serve as a balance against US dominance? Can it help maintain a dialogue between the rest of the world and the US and prevent America from doing whatever it wants? US power cannot be easily checked. First of all, with the disappearance of the Soviet Union, the US stands as the only superpower. Its military and economic power allow it to ignore the UN or any other international What happens if the UN invites someone to New York but the US does not issue The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established in 1957. It came into being to implement US President Dwight Eisenhower s  Atoms for Peace  proposal. It seeks to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to prevent its use for military purposes. IAEA teams regularly inspect nuclear facilities all over the world to ensure that civilian reactors are not being used for military purposes. Secondly, within the UN, the influence of the US is considerable. As the single largest contributor to the UN, the US has unmatched financial power. The fact that the UN is physically located within the US territory gives Washington additional sources of influence. The US also has many nationals in the UN bureaucracy. In addition, with its veto power the US can stop any moves that it finds annoying or damaging to its interests or the interests of its friends and allies. The power of the US and its veto within the organisation also ensure that Washington has a considerable degree of say in the choice of the Secretary General of the UN. The US can and does use this power to  split  the rest of the world and to reduce opposition to its policies. The UN is not therefore a great balance to the US. Nevertheless, in a unipolar world in which the US is dominant, the UN can and has served to bring the US and the rest of the world into discussions over various issues. US leaders, in spite of their frequent criticism of the UN, do see the organisation as serving a purpose in bringing together over 190 nations in dealing with conflict and social and economic development. As for the rest of the world, the UN provides an arena in which it is possible to modify US attitudes and policies. While the rest of the world is rarely united against Washington, and while it is virtually impossible to  balance  US power, the UN Amnesty International is an NGO that campaigns for the protection of human rights all over the world. It promotes respect for all the human rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It believes that human rights are interdependent and indivisible. It prepares and publishes reports on human rights. Governments are not always happy with these reports since a major focus of Amnesty is the misconduct of government authorities. Nevertheless, these reports play an important role in research and advocacy on human rights.   Mike Lane, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics does provide a space within which arguments against specific US attitudes and policies are heard and compromises and concessions can be shaped. The UN is an imperfect body, but without it the world would Human Rights Watch Human Rights Watch is another international NGO involved in research and advocacy on human rights. It is the largest international human rights organisation in the US. It draws the global media s attention to human rights abuses. It helped in building international coalitions like the campaigns to ban landmines, to stop the use of child soldiers and to establish the International HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH be worse off. Given the growing connections and links between societies and issues what we often call  interdependence it is hard to imagine how more than seven billion people would live together without an organisation such as the UN. Technology promises to increase planetary interdependence, and therefore the importance of the UN will only increase. Peoples and governments will have to find ways of supporting and using the UN and other international organisations in ways that are consistent with their own interests and the interests of the international community more Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements about the veto power. Only the permanent members of the Security Council possess the veto power. It s a kind of negative power. The Secretary-General uses this power when not satisfied with One veto can stall a Security Council resolution. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements about the way the UN functions. All security and peace related issues are dealt with in the Humanitarian policies are implemented by the main organs and specialised agencies spread across the globe. Having consensus among the five permanent members on security issues is vital for its implementation. The members of the General Assembly are automatically the members of all other principal organs and specialised agencies of the UN. E x e r c i s e s Which among the following would give more weightage to India s proposal for permanent membership in the Security Council? It has been a member of the UN since its inception It is located in Asia India s growing economic power and stable political system The UN agency concerned with the safety and peaceful use of nuclear technology is: The UN Committee on Disarmament International Atomic Energy Agency UN International Safeguard Committee None of the above WTO is serving as the successor to which of the following organisations General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs General Arrangement on Trade and Tariffs World Health Organisation UN Development Programme Fill in the blanks. The prime objective of the UN is ___________________________ The highest functionary of the UN is called_________________ The UN Security Council has _____ permanent and _____non- ______________________ is the present UN Secretary-General. Match the principal organs and agencies of the UN with their Economic and Social Council International Court of Justice International Atomic Energy Agency UN High Commission for Refugees World Trade Organisation International Monetary Fund World Health Organisation E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s Contemporary World Politics Oversees the global financial system Preservation of international peace and security Looks into the economic and social welfare of the member Safety and peaceful use of nuclear technology Resolves disputes between and among member countries Provides shelter and medical help during emergencies Debates and discusses global issues Administration and coordination of UN affairs Providing good health for all Facilitates free trade among member countries 8. 	 What are the functions of the Security Council? 9. 	 As a citizen of India, how would you support India s candidature for the permanent membership of the Security Council? Justify your proposal. 10. 	 Critically evaluate the difficulties involved in implementing the suggested reforms to reconstruct the UN. 11. 	 Though the UN has failed in preventing wars and related miseries, nations prefer its continuation. What makes the UN an indispensable 12. 	  Reforming the UN means restructuring of the Security Council. Do you agree with this statement? Give arguments for or against this position. E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s In reading about world politics, we frequently encounter the terms  security  or  national security.  Do we know what these terms mean? Often, they are used to stop debate and discussion. We hear that an issue is a security issue and that it is vital for the well-being of the country. The implication is that it is too important or secret to be debated and discussed openly. We see movies in which everything surrounding  national security  is shadowy and dangerous.  Security seems to be something that is not the business of the ordinary citizen. In a democracy, surely this cannot be the case. As citizens of a democracy, we need to know more about the term security. What exactly is it?  And what are India s security concerns? This chapter debates these questions. It introduces two different ways of looking at security and highlights the importance of keeping in mind different contexts or situations which determine our view of Security in the The concern about human security was reflected in the 1994 UNDP s Human Development Report, which contends,  the concept of security has for too long been interpreted narrowly  It has been more related to nation states than people  Forgotten were the legitimate concerns of ordinary people who sought security in their daily lives.  The images above show various forms of security threats. Contemporary World Politics What is Security? At its most basic, security implies freedom from threats. Human existence and the life of a country are full of threats.  Does that mean that every single threat counts as a security threat? Every time a person steps out of his or her house, there is some degree of threat to their existence and way of life. Our world would be saturated with security issues if we took such a broad view of what Those who study security, therefore, generally say that only those things that threaten  core values  should be regarded as being of interest in discussions of security. Whose core values though? The core values of the country as a whole? The core values of ordinary women and men in the street?  Do governments, on behalf of citizens, always have the same notion of core values as the Furthermore, when we speak of threats to core values, how intense should the threats be? Surely there are big and small threats to virtually every value we hold dear.  Can all those threats be brought into the understanding of security? Every time another country does something or fails to do something, this may damage the core values of one s country. Every time a person is robbed in the streets, the security of ordinary people as they live their daily lives is harmed. Yet, we would be paralysed if we took such an extensive view of security: everywhere we looked, the world would be full of dangers. So we are brought to a conclusion:  security relates only to extremely dangerous threats  threats that could so endanger core values that those values would be damaged beyond repair if we did not do something to deal with the situation. Having said that, we must admit that security remains a slippery idea.  For instance, have societies always had the same conception of security?  It would be surprising if they did because Who decides about my security? Some leaders and experts? Can t I decide what is my security? Have you heard of  peacekeeping force ? Do you think this is   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World so many things change in the world around us.  And, at any given time in world history, do all societies have the same conception of security? Again, it would be amazing if six hundred and fifty crore people, organised in nearly 200 countries, had the same conception of security! Let us begin by putting the various notions of security under two groups: traditional and non-traditional conceptions of security. Most of the time, when we read and hear about security we are talking about traditional, national security conceptions of security. In the traditional conception of security, the greatest danger to a country is from military threats.  The source of this danger is another country which by threatening military action endangers the core values of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.  Military action also endangers the lives of ordinary citizens. It is unlikely that in a war only soldiers will be hurt or killed. Quite often, ordinary men and women are made targets of war, to break their support of the war. In responding to the threat of war, a government has three basic choices:  to surrender; to prevent the other side from attacking by promising to raise the costs of war to an unacceptable level; and to defend itself when war actually breaks out so as to deny the attacking country its objectives and to turn back or defeat the attacking forces altogether.  Governments may choose to surrender when actually confronted by war, but they will not advertise this as the policy of the country.  Therefore, security policy is concerned with preventing war, which is called deterrence, and with limiting or ending war, which is Traditional security policy has a third component called balance of power. When countries look around them, they see that some countries are bigger and stronger. This is a clue to who might be a threat in the future.  For instance, a neighbouring country may not say it is preparing for attack. There may be no obvious reason for attack. But the fact that this country is very powerful is a sign War is all about and deaths. How can a war make anyone Economy of war   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics that at some point in the future it may choose to be aggressive. Governments are, therefore, very sensitive to the balance of power between their country and other countries.  They do work hard to maintain a favourable balance of power with other countries, especially those close by, those with whom they have differences, or with those they have had conflicts in the past. A good part of maintaining a balance of power is to build up one s military power, although economic and technological power are also important since they are the basis for military power. A  f o u r t h  a n d  r e l a t e d component of traditional security policy is alliance building. An alliance is a coalition of states that coordinate their actions to deter or defend against military attack. Most alliances are formalised in written treaties and are based on a fairly clear identification of who constitutes the threat. Countries form alliances to increase their effective power relative to another country or alliance. Alliances are based on national interests and can change when national interests change. For example, the US backed the Islamic militants in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, but later attacked them when Al Qaeda a group of Islamic militants led by Osama bin Laden launched terrorist strikes against America on 11 In the traditional view of security, then, most threats to a country s security come from outside its borders. That is because the international system is a rather brutal arena in which there is no central authority capable of controlling behaviour. Within a country, the threat of violence is regulated by an acknowledged central authority   the government.  In world politics, there is no acknowledged central authority that stands above everyone else.  It is tempting to think that the United Nations is such an authority or could become such an institution.  However, as presently constituted, the UN is a creature of its members and has authority only to the extent that the membership allows it to have authority and obeys it. So, in world politics, each country has to be responsible for its own security. How do the big powers react when new countries claim nuclear status? On what basis can we say that some countries can be trusted with nuclear weapons while others can t be?   Christo Komarnitski, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World By now you will have asked yourself:  doesn t security depend on internal peace and order?  How can a society be secure if there is violence or the threat of violence inside its borders?  And how can it prepare to face violence from outside its borders if it is not secure inside its borders? Traditional security must also, therefore, concern itself with internal security.  The reason it is not given so much importance is that after the Second World War it seemed that, for the most powerful countries on earth, internal security was more or less assured.  We said earlier that it is important to pay attention to contexts and situations.  While internal security was certainly a part of the concerns of governments historically, after the Second World War there was a context and situation in which internal security did not seem to matter as much as it had in the past.  After 1945, the US and the Soviet Union appeared to be united and could expect peace within their borders.  Most of the European countries, particularly the powerful Western European countries, faced no serious threats from groups or communities living within those borders. Therefore, these countries focused primarily on threats from outside their What were the external threats facing these powerful countries? Again, we draw attention to contexts and situations.  We know that the period after the Second World War was the Cold War in which the US-led Western alliance faced the Soviet-led Communist alliance. Above all, the two alliances feared a military attack from each other.  Some European powers, in addition, continued to worry about violence in their colonies, from colonised people who wanted independence. We have only to remember the French fighting in Vietnam in the 1950s or the British fighting in Kenya in the 1950s and the early 1960s. As the colonies became free from the late 1940s onwards, their security concerns were often similar to that of the European powers. Some of the newly-independent countries, like the European powers, became members of the Cold War alliances. They, therefore, had to worry about the Cold War becoming a hot war and dragging them into hostilities   against neighbours who might have joined the other side in the Cold War, against the leaders of the alliances (the United States or Soviet Union), or against any of the other partners of the US and Soviet Union. The Cold War between the two superpowers was responsible for approximately one-third of all wars in the post-Second World War period. Most of these wars were fought in the Third World. Just as the European colonial powers feared violence in the colonies, some colonial people feared, after independence, that they might be attacked by their Browse through a and list all the that are taking place around the Contemporary World Politics former colonial rulers in Europe. They had to prepare, therefore, to defend themselves against an The security challenges facing the newly-independent countries of Asia and Africa were different from the challenges in Europe in two ways.  For one thing, the new countries faced the prospect of military conflict with neighbouring countries.  For another, they had to worry about internal military conflict. These countries faced threats not only from outside their borders, mostly from neighbours, but also from within. Many newly- independent countries came to fear their neighbours even more than they feared the US or Soviet Union or the former colonial powers.  They quarrelled over borders and territories or control of people and populations or all of these simultaneously. Internally, the new states worried about threats from separatist movements which wanted to form independent countries. Sometimes, the external and internal threats merged. A neighbour might help or instigate an internal separatist movement leading to tensions between the two neighbouring countries. Internal wars now make up more than 95 per cent of all armed conflicts fought anywhere in the world. Between 1946 and 1991, there was a twelve-fold rise in the number of civil wars the greatest jump in 200 years. So, for the new states, external wars with neighbours and internal wars posed a serious challenge to their security. Traditional Security and In traditional security, there is a recognition that cooperation in limiting violence is possible. These limits relate both to the ends and the means of war. It is now an almost universally-accepted view that countries should only go to war for the right reasons, primarily self-defence or to protect other people from genocide.  War must also be limited in terms of the means that are used.  Armies must avoid killing or hurting non- combatants as well as unarmed and surrendering combatants. They should not be excessively violent.  Force must in any case be used only after all the alternatives Those who fight against their own country must be something. Perhaps it is their insecurity that creates insecurity for Third World Arms   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World Traditional views of security do not rule out other forms of cooperation as well. The most important of these are disarmament, arms control, and confidence building. Disarmament requires all states to give up certain kinds of weapons. For example, the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) and the 1997 Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) banned the production and possession of these weapons. More than 155 states acceded to the BWC and 193 states acceded to the CWC. Both conventions included all the great powers. But the superpowers   the US and Soviet Union   did not want to give up the third type of weapons of mass destruction, namely, nuclear weapons, so they pursued arms control. Arms control regulates the acquisition or development of weapons. The Anti-ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty in 1972 tried to stop the United States and Soviet Union from using ballistic missiles as a defensive shield to launch a nuclear attack. While it did allow both countries to deploy a very limited number of defensive systems, it stopped them from large-scale production of those systems. The US and Soviet Union signed a number of other arms control treaties including the Strategic Arms Limitations Treaty II or SALT II and the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START). The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 was an arms control treaty in the sense that it regulated the acquisition of nuclear weapons: those countries that had tested and manufactured nuclear weapons before 1967 were allowed to keep their weapons; and those that had not done so were to give up the right to acquire them. The NPT did not abolish nuclear weapons; rather, it limited the number of countries that could have them. How funny! First they make deadly and Then they make to save themselves from these weapons. They call it security! The text says:  Whether Elevated or Under Attack, the Department of Homeland Security Terror Meter takes the uncertainty out of staying informed of the level of terror in our nation. Move the Terror Indicator to the current threat level, which corresponds to how terrified the American people are of the threat of terror attacks. Terror is all around us, and can strike at anytime. Thanks to the Terror Meter, you will never have to wonder how terrified you should be. Proceed with caution. Contemporary World Politics Traditional security also accepts confidence building as a means of avoiding violence. Confidence building is a process in which countries share ideas and information with their rivals. They tell each other about their military intentions and, up to a point, their military plans.  This is a way of demonstrating that they are not planning a surprise attack.  They also tell each other about the kind of forces they possess, and they may share information on where those forces are deployed.  In short, confidence building is a process designed to ensure that rivals do not go to war through misunderstanding Overall, traditional conceptions of security are principally concerned with the use, or threat of use, of military force. In traditional security, force is both the principal threat to security and the principal means of achieving security. Non-traditional notions of security go beyond military threats to include a wide range of threats and dangers affecting the conditions of human existence. They begin by questioning the traditional referent of security.  In doing so, they also question the other three elements of security   what is being secured, from what kind of threats and the approach to security.  When we say referent we mean  Security for who?  In the traditional security conception, the referent is the state with its territory and governing institutions.  In the non-traditional conceptions, the referent is expanded.  When we ask  Security for who?  proponents of non-traditional security reply  Not just the state but also individuals or communities or indeed all of humankind. Non- traditional views of security have been called  human security  or Human security is about the protection of people more than the protection of states. Human security and state security should be   and often are   the same thing. But secure states do not automatically mean secure peoples. Protecting citizens from foreign attack may be a necessary condition for the security of individuals, but it is certainly not Now we are talking! That is what I call real security for real The cartoon comments on the massive expenditure on defence and lack of money for peace-related initiatives in the US. Is it any different in our country?   Andy Singer, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World a sufficient one. Indeed, during the last 100 years, more people have been killed by their own governments than by foreign All proponents of human security agree that its primary goal is the protection of individuals. However, there are differences about precisely what threats individuals should be protected from. Proponents of the  narrow  concept of human security focus on violent threats to individuals or, as former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan puts it,  the protection of communities and individuals f r o m  i n t e r n a l  v i o l e n c e. Proponents of the  broad  concept of human security argue that the threat agenda should include hunger, disease and natural disasters because these kill far more people than war, genocide and terrorism combined. Human security policy, they argue, should protect people from these threats as well as from violence. In its broadest formulation, the human security agenda also encompasses economic security and  threats to human dignity. Put differently, the broadest formulation stresses what has been called  freedom from want  and  freedom from fear, The idea of global security emerged in the 1990s in response to the global nature of threats such as global war ming, international terrorism, and health epidemics like AIDS and bird flu and so on. No country can resolve these problems alone. And, in some situations, one country may have to disproportionately bear the brunt of a global problem such as environmental degradation. For example, due to global warming, a sea level rise of 1.5 2.0 meters would flood 20 percent of Bangladesh, inundate most of the Maldives, and threaten nearly half the population of Thailand. Since these problems are global in nature, international cooperation is vital, even though it is difficult to achieve. New Sources of Threats The non-traditional conceptions  both human security and global security focus on the changing nature of threats to security. We will discuss some of these threats in the section below. Terrorism refers to political violence that targets civilians deliberately and indiscriminately. International terrorism involves the citizens or territory of more than one country. Terrorist groups seek to change a political context or condition that they do not like by force or threat of force. Civilian targets are usually chosen to terrorise the public and to use the unhappiness of the public as a weapon against national governments or other parties in conflict. The classic cases of terrorism involve hijacking planes or planting bombs in trains, cafes, markets Contemporary World Politics and other crowded places. Since 11 September 2001 when terrorists attacked the World Trade Centre in America, other governments and public have paid more attention to terrorism, though terrorism itself is not new. In the past, most of the terror attacks have occurred in the Middle East, Europe, Latin America and South Asia. Human rights have come to be classified into three types.  The first type is political rights such as freedom of speech and assembly. The second type is economic and social rights.  The third type is the rights of colonised people or ethnic and indigenous minorities. While there is broad agreement on this classification, there is no agreement on which set of rights should be considered as universal Why do we always look outside when talking about human Don t we have examples from our He doesn t exist! Taking  the  train   Tab, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World human rights, nor what the international community should do when rights are being violated. Since the 1990s, developments such as Iraq s invasion of Kuwait, the genocide in Rwanda,  and the Indonesian military s killing of people in East Timor have led to a debate on whether or not the UN should intervene to stop human rights abuses. There are those who argue that the UN Charter empowers the international community to take up arms in defence of human rights. Others argue that the national interests of the powerful states will determine which instances of human rights violations the UN will act upon. Global poverty is another source of insecurity. World population now at 760 crore  will grow to nearly 1000 crore by the middle of the 21st century. Currently, half the world s population growth occurs in just six countries India, China, Pakistan, Nigeria, Bangladesh and Indonesia. Among the world s poorest countries, population is expected to triple in the next 50 years, whereas many rich countries will see population shrinkage in that period. High per capita income and low population growth make rich states or rich social groups get richer, whereas low incomes and high population growth reinforce each other to make poor states and poor groups Globally, this disparity contributes to the gap between the Northern and Southern countries of the world. Within the South, disparities have also sharpened, as a few countries have managed to slow down population growth and raise incomes while others have failed to do so. For example, most of the Contemporary World Politics world s armed conflicts now take place in sub-Saharan Africa, which is also the poorest region of the world. At the turn of the 21st century, more people were being killed in wars in this region than in the rest of the world combined. Poverty in the South has also led to large-scale migration to seek a better life, especially better economic opportunities, in the North. This has created international political frictions. International law and norms make a distinction between migrants (those who voluntarily leave their home countries) and refugees (those who flee from war, natural disaster or political persecution). States are generally supposed to accept refugees, but they do not have to accept migrants. While refugees leave their country of origin, people who have fled their homes but remain within national borders are called  internally displaced people. Kashmiri Pandits that fled the violence in the Kashmir Valley in the early 1990s are an example of an internally displaced The world refugee map tallies almost perfectly with the world conflicts map because wars and armed conflicts in the South have generated millions of refugees seeking safe haven. From 1990 to 1995, 70 states were involved in 93 wars which killed about 55 lakh people. As a result, individuals, and families and, at times, whole communities have been forced to migrate because of generalised fear of violence or due to the destruction of livelihoods, identities and living environments. A look at the correlation between wars and refugee migration shows that in the 1990s, all but three of the 60 refugee flows coincided with an internal armed conflict. Health epidemics such as HIV-AIDS, bird flu, and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) have rapidly spread across countries through migration, business, tourism and military operations. One country s success or failure in limiting the spread of these diseases affects infections in Take a map of Africa and Asia and Pacific Middle East and North Africa Where the world s displaced people are being hosted Refugees in the world (2017) Security in the Contemporary World By 2003, an estimated 4 crore people were infected with HIV- AIDS worldwide, two-thirds of them in Africa and half of the rest in South Asia. In North America and other industrialised countries, new drug therapies dramatically lowered the death rate from HIV-AIDS in the late 1990s. But these treatments were too expensive to help poor regions like Africa where it has proved to be a major factor in driving the region backward into deeper Other new and poorly understood diseases such as Corona, ebola virus, hantavirus, and hepatitis C have emerged, w h i l e  o l d  d i s e a s e s  l i k e tuberculosis, malaria, dengue fever and cholera have mutated into drug resistant forms that are difficult to treat. Epidemics among animals have major economic effects. Since the late 1990s, Britain has lost billions of dollars of income during an outbreak of the mad-cow disease, and bird flu shut down supplies of poultry exports from several Asian countries. Such epidemics demonstrate the growing inter- dependence of states making their borders less meaningful than in the past and emphasise the need for international cooperation. Expansion of the concept of security does not mean that we can include any kind of disease or distress in the ambit of security. If we do that, the concept of security stands to lose its coherence. Everything could become a security issue. To qualify as a security problem, therefore, an issue must share a minimum common criterion, say, of threatening the very existence of the referent (a state or group of people) though the precise nature of this threat may be different. For example, the Maldives may feel threatened by global warming because a big part of its territory may be submerged with the rising sea level, whereas for countries in Southern Africa, HIV-AIDS poses a serious threat as one in six adults has the disease (one in three for Botswana, the worst case). In 1994, the Tutsi tribe in Rwanda faced a threat to its existence as nearly five lakh of its people were killed by the rival Hutu tribe in a matter of weeks. This shows that non-traditional conceptions of security, like traditional conceptions of security, vary according to local contexts. How should the world address issues shown here? Keshav, The Hindu Contemporary World Politics We can see that dealing with many o f  t h e s e  n o n - to security require t h a n  m i l i t a r y confrontation.  Military force may have a role to play in combating terrorism or in enforcing human rights (and even here there is a limit to what force can achieve), but it is difficult to see what force would do to help alleviate poverty, manage migration and refugee movements, and control epidemics.  Indeed, in most cases, the use of military force would only make matters worse! Far more effective is to devise strategies that involve inter national cooperation. Cooperation may be bilateral (i.e. between any two countries), regional, continental, or global. It would all depend on the nature of the threat and the willingness and ability of countries to respond. Cooperative security may also involve a variety of other players, both international organisations (the UN, the World Health Organisation, the World Bank, the IMF etc.), non- (Amnesty International, the Red Cross, private foundations and charities, religious organisations, trade unions, associations, social and development organisations), businesses and corporations, and    great    personalities (e.g. Mother Teresa, Nelson Cooperative security may involve the use of force as a last resort. The international community may have to sanction the use of force to deal with governments that kill their own people or ignore the misery of their populations who are devastated by poverty, disease and catastrophe. It may have to agree to the use of violence against international terrorists and those who harbour them. Non-traditional security is much better when the use of force is sanctioned and applied collectively by the international community rather than when an individual country decides to use force on its own. India s Security Strategy India has faced traditional (military) and non-traditional threats to its security that have emerged from within as well as outside its borders. Its security strategy has four broad components, which have been used in a varying combination from time to time. The first component was streng- thening its military capabilities because India has been involved in conflicts with its neighbours   Pakistan in 1947 48, 1965, 1971 and 1999; and China in 1962. Since it is surrounded by nuclear-armed countries in I feel happy when I hear that my country has nuclear weapons. But I don t know how exactly it makes me and my family more secure.   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Security in the Contemporary World the South Asian region, India s decision to conduct nuclear tests in 1998 was justified by the Indian government in terms of safeguarding national security. India first tested a nuclear device The second component of India s security strategy has been to strengthen international norms and international institutions to protect its security interests. India s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, supported the cause of Asian solidarity, and the UN as a forum in which international conflicts could be settled.  India also took initiatives to bring about a universal and non-discriminatory non- proliferation regime in which all countries would have the same rights and obligations with respect to weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, biological, chemical). It argued for an equitable New International Economic Order (NIEO).  Most importantly, it used non-alignment to help carve out an area of peace outside the bloc politics of the two superpowers. India joined 160 countries that have signed and ratified the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which provides a roadmap for reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases to check global warming. Indian troops have been sent abroad on UN peacekeeping missions in support of cooperative The third component of Indian security strategy is geared towards meeting security challenges within the country. Several militant groups from areas such as the Nagaland, Mizoram,  the Punjab, and Kashmir among others have, from time to time, sought to break away from India. India has tried to preserve national unity by adopting a democratic political system, which allows different communities and groups of people to freely articulate their grievances and share political Finally, there has been an attempt in India to develop its economy in a way that the vast mass of citizens are lifted out of poverty and misery and huge economic inequalities are not allowed to exist. The attempt has partially succeeded; we are advancing towards overcoming poverty and inequality. Yet democratic politics allows spaces for articulating the voice of the poor and the deprived citizens.  There is a pressure on the democratically elected governments to combine economic growth with human development.  Thus democracy is not just a political ideal; a democratic government is also a way to provide greater security. You will read more about the successes and failures of Indian democracy in this respect in the textbook on politics in India since by the Indian security with its Contemporary World Politics  	 Narrate the following imaginary situation of four villages settled on the banks of Kotabagh, Gewali, Kandali and Goppa are villages adjoining each other beside a river. People in Kotabagh were the first settlers on the riverbank. They had an uninterrupted access to abundant natural resources available in the region. Gradually, people from different regions started coming to this region because of the abundant natural resources and water. Now there are four villages. With time the population of these villages expanded. But resources did not expand. Each village started making claims over natural resources including the boundary of their respective settlement. Inhabitants of Kotabagh argued for a greater share in natural resources, as they were the first settlers. Settlers of Kandali and Gewali said that as they have bigger populations than the others they both need a greater share. The people of Goppa said as they are used to an extravagant life they need a bigger share, though their population is smaller in size. All four villages disagreed with each other s demands and continued to use the resources as they wished. This led to frequent clashes among the villagers. Gradually, everybody felt disgusted with the state of affairs and lost their peace of mind. Now they all wish to live the way they had lived earlier.  But they do not know how to go back to that golden age.  	 Make a brief note describing the characteristics of each village   the description should reflect the actual nature of present-day nations.  	 Divide the classroom into four groups. Each group is to represent a village. Hand over the village notes to the respective groups. The teacher is to allot a time (15 minutes) for group discussions on how to go back to the golden age. Each should develop its own strategy. All groups are to negotiate freely among themselves as village representatives, to arrive at a solution (within 20 minutes). Each would put forth its arguments and counter arguments. The result could be: an amicable agreement accommodating the demands of all, which seldom happens; or, the entire negotiation/discussion ends without achieving the purpose. Ideas for the Teacher Link the villages to nations and connect to the problems of security (threat to geographical territory/ access to natural resources/insurgency, and so on). Talk about the observations made during the negotiation and explain how similarly the nations behave while negotiating on related issues. The activity could be concluded by making reference to some of the current security issues between and among nations. Security in the Contemporary World Match the terms with their meaning: i. 	 Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) ii. 	 Arms Control Giving up certain types of weapons A process of exchanging information on defence matters between nations on a regular basis A coalition of nations meant to deter or defend against military Regulates the acquisition or development of weapons Which among the following would you consider as a traditional security concern / non-traditional security concern / not a threat? The spread of chikungunya / dengue fever Inflow of workers from a neighbouring nation Emergence of a group demanding nationhood for their region Emergence of a group demanding autonomy for their region A newspaper that is critical of the armed forces in the country What is the difference between traditional and non-traditional security? Which category would the creation and sustenance of alliances belong to? What are the differences in the threats that people in the Third World face and those living in the First World face? Is terrorism a traditional or non-traditional threat to security? What are the choices available to a state when its security is threatened, according to the traditional security perspective? What is  Balance of Power ? How could a state achieve this? What are the objectives of military alliances? Give an example of a functioning military alliance with its specific objectives. Rapid environmental degradation is causing a serious threat to security. Do you agree with the statement? Substantiate your E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s Contemporary World Politics 10.	 Nuclear weapons as deterrence or defence have limited usage against contemporary security threats to states. Explain the 11.	 Looking at the Indian scenario, what type of security has been given priority in India, traditional or non-traditional? What examples could you cite to substantiate the argument? 12.	 Read the cartoon below and write a short note in favour or against the connection between war and terrorism depicted in this cartoon. E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. This chapter examines the growing significance of environmental as well as resource issues in world politics. It analyses in a comparative perspective some of the important environmental movements against the backdrop of the rising profile of environmentalism from the 1960s onwards. Notions of common property resources and the global commons too are assessed. We also discuss, in brief, the stand taken by India in more recent environmental debates. Next follows a brief account of the geopolitics of resource competition. We conclude by taking note of the indigenous peoples  voices and concerns from the margins of contemporary world The 1992 Earth Summit has brought environmental issues to the centre-stage of global politics. The pictures above show rainforest and mangroves. Contemporary World Politics in Global Politics In this book we have discussed  world politics  in a fairly limited sense: wars and treaties, rise and decline of state power, the relationship between the governments that represent their countries in the international arena and the role of inter- governmental organisations. In Chapter 5, we expanded the scope of world politics to include issues like poverty and epidemics. That may not have been a very difficult step to take, for we all think that governments are responsible for controlling these. In that sense they fall within the scope of world politics. Now consider some other issues. Do you think they fall within the scope of contemporary Throughout the world, cultivable area is barely expanding any more, and a substantial portion of existing agricultural land is losing fertility. Grasslands have been overgrazed and fisheries over- harvested. Water bodies have suffered extensive depletion and pollution, severely restricting food production. According to the Human Development Report 2016 United Nations Development Programme, 663 million people in developing countries have no access to safe water and 2.4 billion have no access to sanitation, resulting in the death of more than three million children every year. Natural forests   which help stabilise the climate, moderate water supplies, and harbour a majority of the planet s biodiversity on land  are being cut down and people are being displaced. The loss of biodiversity continues due to the destruction of habitat in areas which are rich in A steady decline in the total amount of ozone in the Earth s referred to as the ozone hole) poses a real danger to ecosystems and human Coastal pollution too is increasing globally. Although the open sea is relatively clean, the coastal waters are Politics in forests, politics in water, atmosphere! What is not political then? Around the Aral Sea, thousands of people have had to leave their homes as the toxic waters have totally destroyed the fishing industry. The shipping industry and all related activities have collapsed. Rising concentrations of salt in the soil have caused low crop yields. Numerous studies have been conducted. In fact locals joke that if everyone who d come to study the Aral had brought a bucket of water, the sea would be full by now. Source: www.gobartimes.org Environment and Natural Resources becoming increasingly polluted largely due to land-based activities. If unchecked, intensive human settlement of coastal zones across the globe will lead to further deterioration in the quality of You might ask are we not talking here about  natural phenomena  that should be studied in geography rather than in political science. But think about it again. If the various governments take steps to check of the kind mentioned above, these issues will have political consequences in that sense. Most of them are such that no single government can address them fully. Therefore they have to become part of  world politics. Issues of environment and natural resources are political in another deeper sense. Who causes Who pays the price? And who is responsible for taking corrective action? Who gets to use how much of the natural resources of the Earth? All these raise the issue of who wields how much power. They are, therefore, deeply concerns have a long history, awareness of the environmental consequences of economic growth acquired an increasingly political character from the 1960s onwards. The Club of Rome, a global think tank, published a book in 1972 entitled Limits to Growth, dramatising the potential depletion of the Earth s resources against the backdrop of rapidly growing world population. International agencies, including the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), began holding international conferences and promoting detailed studies to get a more coordinated and effective response to environmental problems. Since then, the environment has emerged as a significant issue of global The growing focus on environmental issues within the arena of global politics was firmly consolidated at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992. This was also called the Earth Summit. The summit was in your own   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Why do you think the fingers are designed like chimneys and the world made into a lighter? Contemporary World Politics attended by 170 states, thousands of NGOs and many multinational corporations. Five years earlier, the 1987 Brundtland Report, Our Common Future, had warned that traditional patterns of economic growth were not sustainable in the long term, especially in view of the demands of the South for further industrial development. What was obvious at the Rio Summit was that the rich and developed countries of the First World, generally referred to as the  global North  were pursuing a different environmental agenda than the poor and developing countries of the Third World, called the  global South. Whereas the Northern states were concerned with ozone depletion and global warming, the Southern states were anxious to address the relationship between economic development and The Rio Summit produced conventions dealing with climate change, biodiversity, forestry, and recommended a list of development practices called  Agenda 21. But it left unresolved considerable differences and difficulties. There was a consensus on combining economic growth with ecological responsibility. This approach to development is commonly known as  sustainable development. The problem however was how exactly this was to be achieved. Some critics have pointed out that Agenda 21 was biased in favour of economic growth rather than ensuring ecological conservation.  Let us look at some of the contentious issues in the global politics of environment. The Protection of Global  Commons  are those resources which are not owned by anyone but rather shared by a community. This could be a  common room, a  community centre, a park or a river. Similarly, there are some Are there different perspectives from which the rich and the poor countries agree to protect the Earth?   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Environment and Natural Resources areas or regions of the world which are located outside the sovereign jurisdiction of any one state, and therefore require common governance by the international community. These are known as res communis humanitatis or global commons. They include the earth s atmosphere, Antarctica (see Box), the ocean floor, and Cooperation over the global commons is not easy. There have been many path-breaking agreements such as the 1959 Protocol, and the 1991 Antarctic Environmental Protocol. A major problem underlying all ecological issues relates to the difficulty of achieving consensus on common environmental agendas on the Very soon we will degradation of the The Antarctic continental region extends over 14 million square kilometres and comprises 26 per cent of the world s wilderness area, representing 90 per cent of all terrestrial ice and 70 per cent of planetary fresh water. The Antarctic also extends to a further 36 million square kilometres of ocean. It has a limited terrestrial life and a highly productive marine ecosystem, comprising a few plants (e.g. microscopic algae, fungi and lichen), marine mammals, fish and hordes of birds adapted to harsh conditions, as well as the krill, which is central to marine food chain and upon which other animals are dependent. The Antarctic plays an important role in maintaining climatic equilibrium, and deep ice cores provide an important source of information about greenhouse gas concentrations and atmospheric temperatures of hundreds and thousands of years ago. Who owns this coldest, farthest, and windiest continent on globe? There are two claims about it. Some countries like the UK, Argentina, Chile, Norway, France, Australia and New Zealand have made legal claims to sovereign rights over Antarctic territory.  Most other states have taken the opposite view that the Antarctic is a part of the global commons and not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of any state. These differences, however, have not prevented the adoption of innovative and potentially far-reaching rules for the protection of the Antarctic environment and its ecosystem. The Antarctic and the Arctic polar regions are subjected to special regional rules of environmental protection. Since 1959, activities in the area have been limited to scientific research, fishing and tourism. Even these limited activities have not prevented parts of the region from being degraded by waste as a result of oil spills. Contemporary World Politics basis of vague scientific evidence and time frames. In that sense the discovery of the ozone hole over the Antarctic in the mid-1980s revealed the opportunity as well as dangers inherent in tackling global environmental problems. Similarly, the history of outer space as a global commons shows that the management of these areas is thoroughly influenced by North-South inequalities. As with the earth s atmosphere and the ocean floor, the crucial issue here is technology and industrial development. This is important because the benefits of exploitative activities in outer space are far from being equal either for the present or future Common but Differentiated We have noted above a difference in the approach to environment between the countries of the  North One of the biggest catastrophes in Africa in the 1970s, a drought turned the best cropland in five countries into cracked and barren earth. In fact, the term environmental refugees came into popular vocabulary after this. Many had to flee their homelands as agriculture was no longer possible. Source: www.gobartimes.org Find out more not sign it? And Environment and Natural Resources and the South. The developed countries of the North want to discuss the environmental issue as it stands now and want everyone to be equally responsible for ecological conservation. The developing countries of the South feel that much of the ecological degradation in the world is the product of industrial development undertaken by the developed degradation, they must also take more responsibility for undoing the damage now. Moreover, the developing countries are in the process of industrialisation and they must not be subjected to the same restrictions, which apply to the developed countries. Thus the special needs of the developing countries must be taken into account in the development, application, and interpretation of rules of inter- national environmental law. This argument was accepted in the Rio Declaration at the Earth Summit in 1992 and is called the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities. The relevant part of the Rio Declaration says that  States shall cooperate in the spirit of global partnership to conserve, protect and restore the health and integrity of the Earth s ecosystem. In view of the different contributions of global environmental degradation, states have common but differentiated responsibilities. The developed countries acknowledge the responsibility that they bear in the international pursuit of sustainable development in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment and of the technological and financial resources they command.  The 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) also provides that the parties should act to protect the climate system  on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.  The parties to the Convention agreed that the largest share of historical and current global emissions of greenhouse gases has originated in developed countries. It was also acknowledged that per capita emissions in developing countries are still relatively low. China, India, and other developing countries were, therefore, exempted from the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol. The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement setting targets for industrialised countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions. Certain gases like Carbon dioxide, Methane, Hydro- fluoro carbons etc. are considered at least partly responsible for global warming - the rise in global temperature which may have catastrophic consequences for life on Earth. The protocol was agreed to in 1997 in Kyoto in Japan, based on principles set out in UNFCCC. That s a cool principle! A bit like the reservation policy in our country, isn t it? Contemporary World Politics Common property represents common property for the group. The underlying norm here is that members of the group have both rights and duties with respect to the nature, levels of use, and the maintenance of a given resource. Through mutual understanding and centuries of practice, many village communities in India, for example, have defined members  rights and responsibilities. A combination of factors, including privatisation, agricultural intensi- fication, population growth and ecosystem degradation have caused common property to dwindle in size, quality, and availability to the poor in much of the world. The institutional arrangement for the actual management of the sacred groves on state-owned forest land appropriately fits the description of a common property regime. Along the forest belt of South India, sacred groves have been traditionally managed by village India s Stand on India signed and ratified the 1997 Kyoto Protocol in August 2002. India, China and other developing countries were exempt from the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol because their contribution to the I heard about some rivers being sold in Latin America. How can common property be sold? Protecting nature for religious reasons is an ancient practice in many traditional societies. Sacred groves in India (parcels of uncut forest vegetation in the name of certain deities or natural or ancestral spirits) exemplify such practice. As a model of community-based resource management, groves have lately gained attention in conservation literature. The sacred groves can be seen as a system that informally forces traditional communities to harvest natural resources in an ecologically sustained fashion. Some researchers believe that sacred groves hold the potential for preserving not only biodiversity and ecological functions, but also cultural diversity. Sacred groves embody a rich set of forest preservation practices and they share characteristics with common property resource systems. Their size ranges from clumps of a few trees to several hundred acres. Traditionally, sacred groves have been valued for their embodied spiritual and cultural attributes. Hindus commonly worshipped natural objects, including trees and groves. Many temples have originated from sacred groves. Deep religious reverence for nature, rather than resource scarcity, seems to be the basis for the long-standing commitment to preserving these forests. In recent years, however, expansion and human settlement have slowly encroached on In many places, the institutional identity of these traditional forests is fading with the advent of new national forest policies. A real problem in managing sacred groves arises when legal ownership and operational control are held by different entities. The two entities in question, the state and the community, vary in their policy norms and underlying motives for using the sacred grove. SACRED GROVES IN INDIA Environment and Natural Resources emission of greenhouse gases during the industrialisation period (that is believed to be causing today s global warming and climate change) was not significant. However, the critics of the Kyoto Protocol point out that sooner or later, both India and China, along with other developing countries, will be among the leading countributors to greenhouse gas emissions. At the G-8 meeting in June 2005, India pointed out that the per capita emission rates of the developing countries are a tiny fraction of those in the developed world. Following the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, India is of the view that the major responsibility of curbing emission rests with the developed countries, which have accumulated emissions over a long period of time. I n d i a   s  i n t e r n a t i o n a l negotiating position relies heavily on principles of historical responsibility, as enshrined in UNFCCC. This acknowledges that developed countries are responsible for most historical and current greenhouse gas emissions, and emphasizes that  economic and social development are the first and overriding priorities of the developing country parties. So I get it! First they destroyed the earth, now it is our turn to do the same! Is that Contemporary World Politics India is wary of recent discussions within UNFCCC about introducing binding commitments on rapidly industrialising countries (such as Brazil, China and India) to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. India feels this contravenes the very spirit of UNFCCC. Neither does it seem fair to impose restrictions on India when the country s rise in per capita carbon emissions by 2030 is likely to still represent less than half the world average of 3.8 tonnes in 2000. Indian emissions are predicted to rise from 0.9 tonnes per capita in 2000 to 1.6 tonnes per capita The Indian government is already participating in global efforts through a number of programmes. For example, India s National Auto-fuel Policy mandates cleaner fuels for vehicles. The Energy Conservation Act, passed in 2001, outlines initiatives to improve energy efficiency. Similarly, the Electricity Act of 2003 encourages the use of renewable energy. Recent trends in importing natural gas and encouraging the adoption of clean coal technologies show that India has been making real efforts. The government is also keen to launch a National Mission on Biodiesel, using about 11 million hectares of land to produce biodiesel by 2011 2012. India ratified the Paris Climate Agreement on 2 October 2016. And India has one of the largest renewable energy programmes in the world. A review of the implementation of the agreements at the Earth Summit in Rio was undertaken by India in 1997. One of the key conclusions was that there had been no meaningful progress with respect to transfer of new and additional financial resources technology on concessional terms to developing nations. India finds it necessary that developed countries take immediate measures to provide developing countries with financial resources and clean technologies to enable them to meet their existing commitments under UNFCCC. India is also of the view that the SAARC countries should adopt a common position on major global environment issues, so that the region s voice carries greater One or Many? We have, so far, looked at the way governments have reacted at the international level to the challenge of environmental degradation. But some of the most significant responses to this challenge have come not from the governments but rather from groups of environ- mentally conscious volunteers working in different parts of the world. Some of them work at the international level, but most of them work at the local level. These environmental movements are amongst the most vibrant, diverse, and powerful social movements across the globe today. It is within social movements that new forms  of political action are born or reinvented. These Environment and Natural Resources movements raise new ideas and long-term visions of what we should do and what we should not do in our individual and collective lives. Here are  just a few examples to show that diversity i s  a n  i m p o r t a n t  t r a i t  o f The forest movements of the South, in Mexico, Chile, Brazil, Malaysia, Indonesia, continental Africa and India (just to list a few examples) are faced with enormous pressures. Forest clearing in the Third World continues at an alarming rate, despite three decades of environmental activism. The destruction of the world s last remaining grand forests has actually increased in the last decade. The minerals industry is one of the most powerful forms of industry on the planet. A large number of economies of the South What distinguishes the forest movements of the South from those of the North is that the forests of the former are still peopled, whilst the forests of the latter are more or less devoid of human habitat or, at least, are perceived as thus. This explains to some extent the prevailing notion of wilderness in the North as a  wild place  where people do not live. In this perspective, humans are not seen as part of nature. In other words,  environment  is perceived as  somewhere out there, as something that should be protected from humans through the creation of parks and reserves. On the other hand, most environmental issues in the South are based on the assumption that people live in Wilderness-oriented perspectives have been predominant in Australia, Scandinavia, North America and New Zealand. In these regions, there are still large tracts of relatively  underdeveloped wilderness, unlike in most European countries. This is not to say that wilderness campaigns are entirely missing in the South. In the Philippines, green organisations fight to protect eagles and other birds of prey from extinction. In India, a battle goes on to protect the alarmingly low number of Bengal tigers. In Africa, a long campaign has been waged against the ivory trade and the savage slaughter of elephants. Some of the most famous wilderness struggles have been fought in the forests of Brazil and Indonesia. All of these campaigns focus on individual species as well as the conservation of the wilderness habitats, which support them. Many of the wilderness issues have been renamed biodiversity issues in recent times, as the concept of wilderness has been proved difficult to sell in the South. Many of these campaigns have been initiated and funded by NGOs such as the Worldwide Wildlife Fund (WWF), in association with local people. ARE FORESTS  WILDERNESS ? Do you agree with the efforts made by ecologists? Do you agree with the way ecologists are   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics to MNCs through the liberalisation of the global economy. The extraction of earth, its use of chemicals, i t s  p o l l u t i o n  o f waterways and land, its clearance of native vegetation, its displacement of communities, amongst other factors, continue to invite criticism and resistance in various parts of the globe. One good example is that of the Philippines, where a vast network of groups and organisations campaigned against the Western Mining Corporation (WMC), an company. Much opposition to the company in its own country, Australia, is based on anti- nuclear sentiments and advocacy for the basic rights of Australian Another group of movements are those involved in struggles against mega-dams. In every country where a mega-dam is being built, one is likely to find an environmental movement opposing it. Increasingly anti- dam movements are pro-river movements for more sustainable and equitable management of river systems and valleys. The early 1980s saw the first anti-dam movement launched in the North, namely, the campaign to save the Franklin River and its surrounding forests in Australia. This was a wilderness and forest campaign as well as anti-dam campaign. At present, there has been a spurt in mega-dam building in the South, from Turkey to Thailand to South Africa, from Indonesia to China. India has had some of the leading anti-dam, pro-river movements. Narmada Bachao Andolan is one of the best known of these movements.  It is significant to note that, in anti-dam and other environmental movements in India, the most important shared idea is non-violence. Resource geopolitics is all about who gets what, when, where and how. Resources have provided some of the key means and motives of global European power expansion. They have also been the focus of inter- state rivalry. Western geopolitical thinking about resources has been dominated by the relationship of trade, war and power, at the core of which were overseas resources and maritime navigation. Since sea power itself rested on access to timber, naval timber supply became a key priority for major European powers from the 17th century onwards. The critical importance of ensuring uninterrupted supply of strategic resources, in particular oil, was well established both during the First World War and the Second Throughout the Cold War the industrialised countries of the North adopted a number of methods to ensure a steady flow of resources. These included the in protests against mine project in Phulbari town, in district of Dinajpur, women, one with her infant child, slogans against the proposed coal mine project in 2006. Environment and Natural Resources deployment of military forces near exploitation sites and along sea-lanes of communication, the stockpiling of strategic resources, efforts to prop up friendly governments in producing countries, as well as support to multinational companies and favourable international agreements. Traditional Western strategic thinking remained concerned with access to supplies, which might be threatened by the Soviet Union. A particular concern was Western control of oil in the Gulf and strategic minerals in Southern and Central Africa. After the end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the security of supply continues to worry government and business decisions with regard to several minerals, in particular radioactive materials. However, oil continues to be the most important resource in global The global economy relied on oil for much of the 20th century as a portable and indispensable fuel. The immense wealth associated with oil generates political struggles to control it, and the history of petroleum is also the history of war and struggle. Nowhere is this more obviously the case than in West Asia and Central Asia. West Asia, specifically the Gulf region, accounts for about 30 per cent of global oil production. But it has about 64 per cent of the planet s known reserves, and is therefore the only region able to satisfy any substantial rise in oil demand. Saudi Arabia has a quarter of the world s total reserves and is the single largest producer. Iraq s known reserves are second only to Saudi Arabia s. And, since substantial portions of Iraqi territory are yet to be fully explored, there is a fair chance that actual reserves might be far larger. The United States, Europe, Japan, and increasingly India and China, which consume this petroleum, are located at a considerable distance from the Water is another crucial resource that is relevant to global   Andy Singer, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics Adapted from http://www.gobartimes.org/gt_covfeature2.htm  The list of petroleum based products in our lives is endless. Toothbrush, pacemaker, paints, inks,....Oil provides the energy for 95 per cent of the world s transportation needs. The whole industrialised world survives on petroleum. We cannot imagine living without it. There are billions of barrels of it under the earth for us to use. Yet there are disputes between countries. Why here is one of the problems  I belong to the Royal Family of the Kingdom of Black Gold. I am what they call filthy rich. Ever since black gold was found in my Kingdom things have never been the same again. Mr. Bigoil and his government came prospecting one day. We struck oil...and a deal. They armed me to the teeth till it hurt. So when I grin my subjects look at me with awe. In return Bigoil and sons get to buy all my oil and loyalty. I am happy and rich and so are they. I turn my blind eye to their military in this holy land. I value precious things. Bigoil says his President values freedom and democracy. So I keep both safely under lock and key in my land. As advised, I did ask myself what can I do for my country. My country has an enormous appetite for oil. So...provide it with oil of course! I believe in the free market system. Free to dig up oil in far away countries, free to create pliable tin-pot dictators to keep local populations at bay and free to destroy We play no politics but pay them at election campaigns and get them to invest in our company. That way we don t have to embarrass ourselves by foolishly waving and smiling at TV cameras. King of the land of Black Gold CEO of Bigoil and sons Leading the good life A new beauty is parked outside our garage. Awesome! Isn t it?... sleek chrome finish, power steering, automatic gears. Excellent pick up and great mileage too. It is low on emissions too...gentle on the atmosphere, you know. Global warming and all that stuff. Now we really are in hurry to zoom off and lead the good life...God Save Mr & Mrs Gobbledoo Toppleton defends freedom and democracy. That s why he is so generous with guns and missiles. Like the ones he gave us to fight the invading Ruffians. He even trained us. We did not realise that it was the oil they were after. Bigoil is always trying to woo us. But we are too busy playing war games. Now we have rules of our own. Toppleton s govt. kept changing its rules. Not fair we said. Some of us now hate Toppleton, his government and his people. Of course their bullets and missiles come in handy when we have to beat them at their game. Make no mistake, we are Errorists. EVERYONE IS PLAYING CRUDE! Environment and Natural Resources politics. Regional variations and the increasing scarcity of freshwater in some parts of the world point to the possibility of disagreements over shared water resources as a leading source of conflicts in the 21st century. Some commentators on world politics have referred to  water wars  to describe the possibility of violent conflict over this life-sustaining resource. Countries that share rivers can disagree over many things.  For instance, a typical disagreement is a downstream (lower riparian) state s objection to pollution, excessive irrigation, or the construction of dams by an upstream (upper riparian) state, which might decrease or degrade the quality of water available to the downstream state. States have used force to protect or seize freshwater resources. Examples of violence include those between Israel, Syria, and Jordan in the 1950s and 1960s over attempts by each side to divert water from the Jordan and Yarmuk Rivers, and more recent threats between Turkey, Syria, and Iraq over the construction of dams on the Euphrates River. A number of studies show that countries that share rivers   and many countries do share rivers   are involved in military conflicts with each other. The Indigenous Peoples and Their Rights The question of indigenous people brings the issues of environment, resources and politics together. The UN defines indigenous populations as comprising the descendants of peoples who inhabited the present territory of a country at the time when persons of a different culture or ethnic origin arrived there from other parts of the world and overcame them. Indigenous people today live more in conformity with their particular social, economic, and cultural customs and traditions than the institutions of the country of which they now form a part. How are these from the many water conflicts within our The larger part of the Earth is water than the land and yet the cartoonist decides to show larger image of the land than water. How does the image show the scarcity of water?   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Contemporary World Politics In the context of world politics, what are the common interests of approximately 30 crore indigenous peoples spread throughout the world including India? There are 20 lakh indigenous people of the Cordillera region of the Philippines, 10 lakh Mapuche people of Chile, six lakh tribal people of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bangladesh, 35 lakh North American natives, 50,000 Kuna living east of Panama Canal and 10 lakh Small Peoples of the Soviet North. Like other social movements, indigenous people speak of their struggles, their agenda and their rights. The indigenous voices in world politics call for the admission of indigenous people to the world community as equals. Indigenous people occupy areas in Central and South America, Africa, India (where they are known as Tribals) and Southeast Asia. Many of the present day Why don t we hear much about people and their movements? Is the media biased against island states in the Oceania region (including Australia and New Zealand), were inhabited by the Polynesian, Melanesian and Micronesian people over the course of thousands of years. They appeal to governments to come to terms with the continuing existence of indigenous nations as enduring communities with an identity of their own.  Since times immemorial  is the phrase used by indigenous people all over the world to refer to their continued occupancy of the lands from which they originate. The worldviews of indigenous societies, irrespective of their geographical location, are strikingly similar with respect to land and the variety of life systems supported by it. The loss of land, which also means the loss of an economic resource base, is the most obvious threat Spoonful of Ecology Do you agree with this perspective where a man from an urban (developed!) area becomes greedy   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Environment and Natural Resources to the survival of indigenous people. Can political autonomy be enjoyed without its attachment to the means of physical survival? In India, the description  indigenous people  is usually applied to the Scheduled Tribes who constitute nearly eight per cent of the population of the country. With the exception of small communities of hunters and gatherers, most indigenous populations in India depend for their subsistence primarily on the cultivation of land. For centuries, if not millennia, they had free access to as much land as they could cultivate. It was only after the establishment of the British colonial rule that areas, which had previously been inhabited by the Scheduled Tribe communities, were subjected to outside forces. Although they enjoy a constitutional protection in political representation, they have not got much of the benefits of development in the country. In fact they have paid a huge cost for development since they are the single largest group among the people displaced by various developmental projects since Issues related to the rights of the indigenous communities have been neglected in domestic and international politics for very long. During the 1970s, growing international contacts among indigenous leaders from around the world aroused a sense of common concern and shared experiences. The World Council of Indigenous Peoples was formed in 1975. The Council became subsequently the first of 11 indigenous NGOs to receive consultative status in the UN. Many of the movements against globalisation, discussed in Chapter 7, have focussed on the rights of the indigenous people.  	 Each student is asked to list any ten items they consume/use every day. (The list could include   pen/paper/eraser/  	 Ask students to calculate the amount of natural resources being used to make these items. (For finished products like pen/pencil/computer etc., students will calculate the amount of resources and for items like water they could calculate the amount of electricity used for purifying and pumping along with gallons of water). Each would calculate and arrive at an approximate Ideas for the Teacher Collect the approximate figures from each student and sum up all to arrive at total resources consumed by the students of that particular class. (Teacher is to act as a facilitator and allow students to do the calculations.) Project this figure to other classes of the same school, then to schools across the country. The country figure could be used to measure the amount of resources being used by schools in other countries too. (The teacher is to have background information about the resources being used by students in a few select countries. While selecting countries, teacher should ensure that the selected countries belong to the developed / developing countries category).   Ask students to imagine the amount of resources we are consuming and also to estimate future consumption. Contemporary World Politics Which among the following best explains the reason for growing concerns about the environment? The developed countries are concerned about protecting nature. Protection of the environment is vital for indigenous people and The environmental degradation caused by human activities has become pervasive and has reached a dangerous level. None of the above. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements about the Earth Summit: It was attended by 170 countries, thousands of NGOs and many The summit was held under the aegis of the UN. For the first time, global environmental issues were firmly consolidated at the political level. It was a summit meeting. Which among the following are TRUE about the global commons? The Earth s atmosphere, Antarctica, ocean floor and outer space are considered as part of the global commons. The global commons are outside sovereign jurisdiction. The question of managing the global commons has reflected the The countries of the North are more concerned about the protection of the global commons than the countries of the South. What were the outcomes of the Rio Summit? What is meant by the global commons? How are they exploited and What is meant by  common but differentiated responsibilities ? How could we implement the idea? Why have issues related to global environmental protection become the priority concern of states since the 1990s? Compromise and accommodation are the two essential policies required by states to save planet Earth.  Substantiate the statement in the light of the ongoing negotiations between the North and South on environmental issues. The most serious challenge before the states is pursuing economic development without causing further damage to the global environment. How could we achieve this? Explain with a few examples. E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s In this final chapter of the book we look at globalisation, something that has been referred to in many chapters of this book and textbooks of many other subjects. We begin by analysing the concept of globalisation and then examine its causes. We then discuss at length the political, economic and cultural consequences of globalisation. Our interest is also in studying the impact of globalisation on India as well as how India is affecting globalisation. We finally draw attention to resistance to globalisation and how social movements in India also form part of this resistance. Contemporary World Politics The Concept of Janardhan works in a call centre. He leaves late in the evening for work, becomes John when he enters his office, acquires a new accent and speaks a different language (than he does when he is at home) to communicate with his clients who are living thousands of miles away. He works all night, which is actually day time for his overseas customers. Janardhan is rendering a service to somebody who in all probability he is never likely to meet physically. This is his daily routine. His holidays also do not correspond to the Indian calendar but to those of his clients who happen to be from Ramdhari has gone shopping to buy a birthday gift for his nine-year old daughter. He has promised her a small cycle and decides to search the market for something he finds affordable as well as of reasonable quality. He finally does buy a cycle, which is actually manufactured in China but is being marketed in India. It meets his requirements of quality as well as affordability, and Ramdhari decides to go ahead with his purchase. Last year, Ramdhari on his daughter s insistence had bought her a Barbie doll, which was originally manufactured in the US but was being sold in India. Sarika is a first generation learner who has done remarkably well throughout her school and college life by working very hard. She now has an opportunity to take on a job and begin an independent career, which the women of her family had never dreamt of earlier. While some of her relatives are opposed, she finally decides to go ahead because of the new opportunities that have been made available to All three examples illustrate an aspect each of what we call globalisation. In the first instance Janardhan was participating in the globalisation of services. Ramdhari s birthday purchases tell us something about the movement of commodities from one part of the world to another. Sarika is faced with a conflict of values partly originating from a new opportunity that earlier was not available to the women in her family but today is part of a reality that has gained wider If we look for examples of the use of the term  globalisation  in real life, we will realise that it is used in various contexts. Let us look at some examples, different from the ones that we have looked Some farmers committed suicide because their crops failed. They had bought very expensive seeds supplied by a multinational company An Indian company bought a major rival company based in Europe, despite protests by some of the current owners. So many Nepalese workers come to India to work. Is that for a week Many retail shopkeepers fear that they would lose their livelihoods if some major international companies open retail chains in the country. A film producer in Mumbai was accused of lifting the story of his film from another film made in Hollywood. A militant group issued a statement threatening college girls who wear western These examples show us that globalisation need not always be positive; it can have negative consequences for the people. Indeed, there are many who believe that globalisation has more negative consequences than positive. These examples also show us that globalisation need not be only about the economic issues, nor is the direction of influence always from the rich to the poor countries. Since much of the usage tends to be imprecise, it becomes important to clarify what we mean by globalisation. Globalisation as a concept fundamentally deals with flows. These flows could be of various kinds   ideas moving from one part of the world to another, capital shunted between two or more places, commodities being traded across borders, and people moving in search of better livelihoods to different parts of the world. The crucial element is the  worldwide interconnectedness  that is created and sustained as a consequence of these constant Much of the Chinese stuff that comes to India is smuggled. lead to smuggling? This chapter has a series of images e c o n o m i c  a n d cultural aspects of from different parts of the world. Contemporary World Politics Globalisation is a multi- dimensional concept. It has political, economic and cultural manifestations, and these must be adequately distinguished. It is wrong to assume that globalisation has purely economic dimensions, just as it would also be mistaken to assume that it is a purely cultural phenomenon. The impact of globalisation is vastly uneven   it affects some societies more than others and some parts of some societies more than others   and it is important to avoid drawing general conclusions about the impact of globalisation without paying sufficient attention to Causes of Globalisation What accounts for globalisation? If globalisation is about the flows of ideas, capital, commodities, and people, it is perhaps logical to ask if there is anything novel about this phenomenon. Globalisation in terms of these four flows has taken place through much of human history. However, those who argue that there is something distinct about point out that it is the scale and speed of these flows that account for the uniqueness of globalisation in the contemporary era. Globalisation has a strong historical basis, and it is important to view contem- porary flows against this While globalisation is not caused by any single factor, technology remains a critical element. There is no doubt that the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, and the microchip in more recent times has between different parts of the world. When printing initially came into being it laid the basis for the creation of nationalism. So also today we should expect that technology will affect the way we think of our personal but also our collective lives. The ability of ideas, capital, commodities and people to move more easily from one part of the world to another has been made possible largely by technological advances. The pace of these flows may vary. For instance, the movement of capital and commodities will most likely be quicker and wider than the movement of peoples across different parts of the world. Globalisation, however, does not emerge merely because of the availability of improved communications. What is important is for people in different parts of the world to recognise these interconnections with the rest of the world. Currently, we are aware of the fact that events taking place in one part of the world could have an impact on another part of the world. The Bird flu or tsunami is not confined to any particular nation. It does not respect national boundaries. a new name for do we need a new   Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Similarly, when major economic events take place, their impact is felt outside their immediate local, national or regional environment at the global level. One of the debates that has been generated as a consequence of contemporary processes of globalisation relates to its ongoing political impact. How does globalisation affect traditional conceptions of state sovereignty? There are at least three aspects that we need to consider when answering this question. At the most simple level, globalisation results in an erosion of state capacity, that is, the ability of government to do what they do. All over the world, the old  welfare state  is now giving way to a more minimalist state that performs certain core functions such as the maintenance of law and order and the security of its citizens. However, it withdraws from many of its earlier welfare functions directed at economic and social well-being. In place of the welfare state, it is the market that becomes the prime determinant of economic and social priorities. The entry and the increased role of multinational companies all over the world leads to a reduction in the capacity of governments to take decisions on At the same time, globalisation does not always reduce state capacity. The primacy of the state Contemporary World Politics continues to be the unchallenged basis of political community. The old jealousies and rivalries between countries have not ceased to matter in world politics. The state continues to discharge its essential functions (law and order, national security) and consciously withdraws from certain domains from which it wishes to. States continue to be important. Indeed, in some respects state capacity has received a boost as a consequence of globalisation, with enhanced technologies available at the disposal of the state to collect information about its citizens. With this information, the state is better able to rule, not less able. Thus, states become more powerful than they were earlier as an outcome of the new While everything may not be known about the economic facets of globalisation, this particular dimension shapes a large part of the content and direction of contemporary debates A part of the problem has to do with defining economic globalisation itself. The mention of economic globalisation draws our attention immediately to the role of international institutions like the IMF and the WTO and the role they play in determining economic policies across the world. Yet, globalisation must not be viewed in such narrow terms. Economic globalisation involves many actors other than these international institutions. A much broader way of understanding of economic globalisation requires us to look at the distribution of economic gains, i.e. who gets the most from globalisation and who gets less, indeed who loses from it. What is often called economic globalisation usually involves greater economic flows among different countries of the world. Some of this is voluntary and some forced by international institutions and power ful countries. As we saw in the examples at the beginning of this chapter, this flow or exchange can take various forms: commodities, capital, people and ideas. Globalisation has involved greater trade in commodities across the globe; the restrictions imposed by   Milt Priggee, Cagle Cartoons Inc. different countries on allowing the imports of other countries have been reduced. Similarly, the restrictions on movement of capital across countries have also been reduced. In operational terms, it means that investors in the rich countries can invest their money in countries other than their own, including developing countries, where they might get better returns. Globalisation has also led to the flow of ideas across national boundaries. The spread of internet and computer related services is an example of that. But globalisation has not led to the same degree of increase in the movement of people across the globe. Developed countries have carefully guarded their borders with visa policies to ensure that citizens of other countries cannot take away the jobs of their own In thinking about the consequences of globalisation, it is necessary to keep in mind that the same set of policies do not lead to the same results everywhere. While globalisation has led to similar economic policies adopted by governments in different parts of the world, this has generated vastly different outcomes in different parts of the world. It is again crucial to pay attention to specific context rather than make simple generalisations in this Economic globalisation has created an intense division of opinion all over the world. Those who are concerned about social When we talk about  safety net  it means that we expect some people to fall down because of Contemporary World Politics justice are worried about the extent of state withdrawal caused by processes of economic globalisation. They point out that it is likely to benefit only a small section of the population while impoverishing those who were dependent on the government for jobs and welfare (education, health, sanitation, etc.). They have emphasised the need to ensure institutional safeguards or creating  social safety nets  to minimise the negative effects of globalisation on those who are economically weak. Many movements all over the world feel that safety nets are insufficient or unworkable. They have called for a halt to forced economic globalisation, for its results would lead to economic ruin for the weaker countries, especially for the poor within these countries. Some economists have described economic globalisation as re- colonisation of the world. Advocates of economic globalisation argue that it generates greater economic growth and well-being for larger sections of the population when there is de-regulation. Greater trade among countries allows each economy to do what it does best. This would benefit the whole world. They also argue that economic globalisation is inevitable and it is not wise to resist the march of history. More moderate supporters of globalisation say that globalisation provides a challenge that can be responded to intelligently without accepting it uncritically. What, however, cannot be denied is the increased momentum towards inter-dependence and integration between governments, businesses, and ordinary people in different parts of the world as a result of globalisation. The consequences of globalisation are not confined only to the sphere of politics and economy. Globalisation affects us in our home, in what we eat, drink, wear and indeed in what we think. It shapes what we think are our preferences. The cultural effect of globalisation leads to the fear that this process poses a threat to cultures in the world. It does so, because globalisation leads to the rise of a uniform culture or what is called cultural homogenisation. The rise of a uniform culture is not the emergence of a global culture. What we have in the Make a list of are used by you or your   Andy Singer, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Invading new markets name of a global culture is the imposition of Western culture on the rest of the world. This phenomenon is known as the soft power of US hegemony. The popularity of a burger or blue jeans, some argue, has a lot to do with the powerful influence of the American way of life. Thus, the culture of the politically and economically dominant society leaves its imprint on a less powerful society, and the world begins to look more like the dominant power wishes it to be. Those who make this argument often draw attention to the  McDonaldisation  of the world, with cultures seeking to buy into the dominant American dream. This is dangerous not only for the poor countries but for the whole of humanity, for it leads to the shrinking of the rich cultural heritage of the entire globe. At the same time, it would be a mistake to assume that cultural consequences of globalisation are only negative. Cultures are not static things. All cultures accept outside influences all the time. Some external influences are negative because they reduce our choices. But sometimes external influences simply enlarge our choices, and sometimes they modify our culture without overwhelming the traditional. The burger is no substitute for a masala dosa and, therefore, does not pose any real challenge. It is simply added on to our food choices. Blue jeans, on the other hand, can go well with a homespun khadi kurta. Here Why are we scared of Western culture? Are we not confident of our own culture? Make a list of all the known people of your about this. How Contemporary World Politics the outcome of outside influence is a new combination that is unique   a khadi kurta worn over jeans. Interestingly, this clothing combination has been exported back to the country that gave us blue jeans so that it is possible to see young Americans wearing a kurta and jeans! While cultural homogenisation is an aspect of globalisation, the same process also generates precisely the opposite effect. It leads to each culture becoming more different and distinctive. This phenomenon is called cultural heterogenisation. This is not to deny that there remain differences in power when cultures interact but instead more fundamentally to suggest that cultural exchange is rarely one way. India and Globalisation We said earlier that globalisation has occurred in earlier periods in history in different parts of the world. Flows pertaining to the movement of capital, commodities, ideas and people go back several centuries in Indian history. During the colonial period, as a consequence of Britain s imperial ambitions, India became an exporter of primary goods and raw materials and a consumer of finished goods. After independence, because of this experience with the British, we decided to make things ourselves rather than relying on others. We also decided not to allow others to export to us so that our own producers could learn to make things. This  protectionism  generated its own problems. While some advances were made in certain arenas, critical sectors such as health, housing and primary education did not receive the attention they deserved. India had a fairly sluggish rate of In 1991, responding to a financial crisis and to the desire for higher rates of economic growth, India embarked on a programme of economic reforms that has sought increasingly to de-regulate various sectors including trade and foreign investment. While it may be too early to say how good this has been for India, the ultimate test is not high growth rates as making sure that the benefits of growth are shared so that everyone is better off. An insider s view of a call centre job Working in a call centre, in fact, can be enlightening in its own way. As you handle calls from Americans, you get an insight into the true American culture. An average American comes out as more lively and honest than we imagine  However, not all calls and conversations are pleasant. You can also receive irate and abusive callers. Sometimes the hatred that they exhibit in their tone on knowing that their call has been routed to India is very stressful. Americans tend to perceive every Indian as one who has denied them their One can receive a call, beginning on the lines of  I spoke to a South African a few minutes ago and now I m speaking to an Indian!  or  Oh gosh, an Indian again! Connect me to an American please.... It s difficult to find the right response in situations of this kind. Source: Report by Ranjeetha Urs in The Hindu, 10 January 2005.  Gosh, an Indian again!  We have already noted that globalisation is a very contentious subject and has invited strong criticism all over the globe. Critics of globalisation make a variety of arguments. Those on the left argue that contemporary globalisation represents a particular phase of global capitalism that makes the rich richer (and fewer) and the poor poorer. Weakening of the state leads to a reduction in the capacity of the state to protect the interest of its poor. Critics of globalisation from the political right express anxiety over the political, economic and cultural effects. In political terms, they also fear the weakening of the state. Economically, they want a return to self-reliance and protectionism, at least in certain areas of the economy. Culturally, they are worried that traditional culture will be harmed and people will lose their age-old values and It is important to note here that anti-globalisation movements too participate in global networks, allying with those who feel like them in other countries. Many are not opposed to the idea of globalisation per se as much as they are opposed to a specific programme of globalisation, which they see as a form of In 1999, at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Ministerial Meeting there were widespread It is true sometimes I like the new songs. Didn t we all like to dance a bit? Does it really matter if it is influenced by Contemporary World Politics The activity enables students to understand how globalisation has penetrated our lives and the impact the all-inclusive nature of globalisation has on an individual, a community and a nation as a  	 Students are to list the names of products   food products, white goods, and luxuries, they are familiar  	 Students are to write down their favourite TV The teacher is to collect the list and consolidate. Divide the classroom (into convenient groups) and assign each group a number of items (depends on how exhaustive the list is) and TV programmes. Let students find out who are the manufacturers of the products they use everyday and the makers/ sponsors of their favourite TV programmes. The teacher is to (by involving students) classify the names of manufacturers and makers/sponsors collected by students into three categories: exclusive foreign companies; exclusive Indian companies; and companies working in collaboration. Ideas for the Teacher The teacher is to debrief the students focussing on: How globalisation has been impacting our lives. Drawing the attention of the students to different faces of globalisation. As we use more foreign goods, our own small- scale industries have been losing their customers and are closing The activity could be concluded by introducing students to the ongoing debates about the impact of globalisation on the developing and developed countries. protests at Seattle alleging unfair trading practices by the economically powerful states. It was argued that the interests of the developing world were not given sufficient importance in the evolving global economic system. The World Social Forum (WSF) is another global platform, which brings together a wide coalition composed of human rights labour, youth and women activists opposed to neo-liberal globalisation. The first WSF meeting was organised in Porto Alegre, Brazil in 2001. The fourth WSF meeting was held in Mumbai in 2004. The latest WSF meeting was held in Nepal in February India and Resistance to What has been India s experience in resisting globalisation?  Social movements play a role in helping people make sense of the world Which of the statements are TRUE about globalisation? Globalisation is purely an economic phenomenon. Globalisation began in 1991. Globalisation is the same thing as westernisation. Globalisation is a multi-dimensional phenomenon. Which of the statements are TRUE about the impact of globalisation? Globalisation has been uneven in its impact on states and Globalisation has had a uniform impact on all states and around them and finding ways to deal with matters that trouble them. Resistance to globalisation in India has come from different quarters. There have been left wing protests to economic liberalisation voiced through political parties as well as through forums like the Indian Social Forum. Trade unions of industrial workforce as well as those representing farmer interests have organised protests against the entry of multinationals. The patenting of certain plants like Neem by American and European firms has also generated considerable Resistance to globalisation has also come from the political right. This has taken the form of objecting particularly to various cultural influences   ranging from the availability o f  f o r e i g n  T. V.  c h a n n e l s provided by cable networks, celebration of Valentine s Day, and westernisation of the dress tastes of girl students in schools Contemporary World Politics The impact of globalisation has been confined to the political Globalisation inevitably results in cultural homogeneity. Which of the statements are TRUE about the causes of globalisation? Technology is an important cause of globalisation. Globalisation is caused by a particular community of people. Globalisation originated in the US. Economic interdependence alone causes globalisation. Which of the statements are TRUE about globalisation? Globalisation is only about movement of commodities Globalisation does not involve a conflict of values. Services are an insignificant part of globalisation. Globalisation is about worldwide interconnectedness. Which of the statements are FALSE about globalisation? Advocates of globalisation argue that it will result in greater Critics of globalisation argue that it will result in greater economic Advocates of globalisation argue that it will result in cultural Critics of globalisation argue that it will result in cultural What is worldwide interconnectedness? What are its components? How has technology contributed to globalisation? Critically evaluate the impact of the changing role of the state in the developing countries in the light of globalisation. What are the economic implications of globalisation? How has globalisation impacted on India with regard to this particular 10. 	 Do you agree with the argument that globalisation leads to cultural 11. 	 How has globalisation impacted on India and how is India in turn impacting on globalisation? E x e r c i s e s In this chapter  The first few years in the life of independent India were full of challenges. Some of the most pressing ones concerned national unity and territorial integrity of India. We begin the story of politics in India since independence by looking at how three of these challenges of nation- building were successfully negotiated in the first decade after 1947. Freedom came with partition, which resulted in large scale violence and displacement and challenged the very idea of a secular India. The integration of the princely states into the Indian union needed The internal boundaries of the country needed to be drawn afresh to meet the aspirations of the people who spoke different languages. In the next two chapters we shall turn to other kinds of challenges faced by the country in this early phase. Credit: Sunil Janah In a moment of optimism, Hindus and Hindus and Muslims in Kolkata in 1947 marked the end of communal violence by jointly flying the flags of India and Pakistan from trucks patrolling the city. This rare photograph captured the joy of freedom and the tragedy of partition in India and Challenges for the new nation-state At the hour of midnight on 14-15 August 1947, India attained independence. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of free India, addressed a special session of the Constituent Assembly that night. This was the famous  tryst with destiny  speech that you are familiar with. This was the moment Indians had been waiting for.  You have read in your history textbooks that there were many voices in our national movement. But there were two goals almost everyone agreed upon: one, that after independence, we shall run our country through democratic government; and two, that the government will be run for the good of all, particularly the poor and the socially disadvantaged groups. Now that the country was independent, the time had come to realise the promise of This was not going to be easy. India was born as a nation-state in very difficult circumstances. Perhaps no other country by then was born in a situation more difficult than that of India in 1947. Freedom came with the partition of the country. The year 1947 was a year of unprecedented violence and trauma of displacement. It was in this situation that independent India started on its journey to achieve several objectives. Yet the turmoil that accompanied independence did not make our leaders lose sight of the multiple challenges that faced the new nation. Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru speaking from the red fort, 15 August 1947 4                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Broadly, independent India faced three kinds of challenges. The first and the immediate challenge was to shape a nation that was united, yet accommodative of the diversity in our society. India was a land of continental size and diversity. Its people spoke different languages and followed different cultures and religions. At that time it was widely believed that a country full of such kinds of diversity could not remain together for long. The partition of the country appeared to prove everyone s worst fears. There were serious questions about the future of India: Would India survive as a unified country? Would it do so by emphasising national unity at the cost of every other objective? Would it mean rejecting all regional and sub-national identities? And there was an urgent question: How was integration of the territory of India to be achieved? The second challenge was to establish democracy. You have already studied the Indian Constitution. You know that the Constitution granted fundamental rights and extended the right to vote to every citizen. India adopted representative democracy based on the parliamentary form of government. These features ensure that the political competition would take place in a democratic framework. Hindustan Times, 19 July 1947 Tomorrow we shall be free from the slavery of the British domination. But at midnight India will be partitioned. Tomorrow will thus be a day of rejoicing as well as of mourning. 14 August 1947, Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              5 A democratic constitution is necessary but not sufficient for establishing a democracy. The challenge was to develop democratic practices in accordance with the Constitution. The third challenge was to ensure the development and well- being of the entire society and not only of some sections. Here again the Constitution clearly laid down the principle of equality and special protection to socially disadvantaged groups and religious and cultural communities. The Constitution also set out in the Directive Principles of State Policy the welfare goals that democratic politics must achieve.  The real challenge now was to evolve effective policies for economic development and eradication How did independent India respond to these challenges? To what extent did India succeed in achieving the various objectives set out by the Constitution? This entire book is an attempt to respond to these questions. The book tells the story of politics in India since independence so as to equip you to develop your own answers to big questions like these. In the first three chapters we look at how the three challenges mentioned above were faced in the early years after independence. In this chapter, we focus on the first challenge of nation- building that occupied centre-stage in the years immediately after Independence.  We begin by looking at the events that formed the context of Independence.  This can help us understand why the issue of national unity and security became a primary challenge at the time of Independence. We shall then see how India chose to shape itself into a nation, united by a shared history and common destiny.  This unity had to reflect the aspirations of people across the different regions and deal with the disparities that existed among regions and different sections of people. In the next two chapters we shall turn to the challenge of establishing a democracy and achieving economic development with equality and justice. I always wanted a time machine, so that I can go back and participate in the celebrations of 15 August 1947. But this looks different from what I thought. These three stamps were issued in 1950 to mark the first republic day on 26 January 1950. What do the images on these stamps tell you about the challenges to the new republic? If you were asked to design these stamps in 1950, which images would you have chosen? 6                                                                    Politics in India since Independence The Dawn of Freedom Faiz Ahmed Faiz This scarred, marred brightness, this bitten-by-night dawn - The one that was awaited, surely, this is not that dawn. This is not the dawn yearning for which Had we set out, friends, hoping to find The final destination of stars in the wilderness of the sky. Somewhere, at least, must be a shore for the languid waves of the night, Somewhere at least must anchor the sad boat of the heart   Translation of an extract from urdu poem  Subh-e-azadi We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these angularities of the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community and the Muslim community   because even as regards Muslims you have Pathans, Punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have Brahmins, Vaishnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis, and so on   will vanish.   You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or creed   that has nothing to do with the business of the State. Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Presidential Address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan at 11 August 1947. Faiz Ahmed Faiz (1911-1984) Born in Sialkot; stayed in Pakistan after partition. A leftist in his political leanings, he opposed the Pakistani regime and was imprisoned. Collections of his poetry include Naksh-e-Fariyadi, Dast-e-Saba and Zindan-Nama. Regarded as one of the greatest poets of South Asia in the twentieth century. Dawn, Karachi, 14 August 1947 6                                                                    P Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              7 Today I call Waris Shah Today, I call Waris Shah,  Speak from your grave  And turn, today, the book of love s next affectionate page Once, a daughter of Punjab cried and you wrote a wailing saga Today, a million daughters, cry to you, Waris Shah Rise! O  narrator of the grieving; rise! look at your Punjab Today, fields are lined with corpses, and blood fills the Chenab Someone has mixed poison in the five rivers  flow Their deadly water is, now, irrigating our lands galore This fertile land is sprouting, venom from every pore The sky is turning red from endless cries of gore The toxic forest wind, screams from inside its wake Turning each flute s bamboo-shoot, into a deadly snake   Translation of an extract from a Punjabi poem  Aaj Akhan Waris Shah Nun  We have a Muslim minority who are so large in numbers that they cannot, even if they want, go anywhere else. That is a basic fact about which there can be no argument. Whatever the provocation from Pakistan and whatever the indignities and horrors inflicted on non-Muslims there, we have got to deal with this minority in a civilised manner. We must give them security and the rights of citizens in a democratic State. If we fail to do so, we shall have a festering sore which will eventually poison the whole body politic and probably destroy it. Jawaharlal Nehru, Letter to Chief Ministers, 15 October 1947. Amrita Pritam (1919 2005): A prominent Punjabi poet and fiction writer. Recipient of Sahitya Akademi Award, Padma Shree and Jnanapeeth Award. After partition she made Delhi her second home. She was active in writing and editing  Nagmani  a Punjabi monthly magazine till her last. The Times of India, Bombay, 15 August 1947 8                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Partition: displacement and rehabilitation On 14-15 August 1947, not one but two nation-states came into existence   India and Pakistan.  This was a result of  partition, the division of British India into India and Pakistan.  The drawing of the border demarcating the territory of each country marked the culmination of political developments that you have read about in the history textbooks. According to the  two-nation theory  advanced by the Muslim League, India consisted of not one but two  people, Hindus and Muslims. That is why it demanded Pakistan, a separate country for the Muslims. The Congress opposed this theory and the demand for Pakistan. But several political developments in 1940s, the political competition between the Congress and the Muslim League and the British role led to the decision for the creation of Pakistan. Process of partition Thus it was decided that what was till then known as  India  would be divided into two countries,  India  and  Pakistan. Such a division was not only very painful, but also very difficult to decide and to implement. It was decided to follow the principle of religious majorities. This basically means that areas where the Muslims were in majority would make up the territory of Pakistan. The rest was to stay The idea might appear simple, but it presented all kinds of difficulties. First of all, there was no single belt of Muslim majority areas in British India. There were two areas of concentration, one in the west and one in the east. There was no way these two parts could be joined. So it was decided that the new country, Pakistan, will comprise two territories, West and East Pakistan separated by a long expanse of Indian territory.  Secondly, not all Muslim majority areas wanted to be in Pakistan. Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, the undisputed leader of the North Western Frontier Province and known as  Frontier Gandhi, was staunchly opposed to the two-nation theory. Eventually, his voice was simply ignored and the NWFP was made to merge The third problem was that two of the Muslim majority provinces of British India, Punjab and Bengal, had very large areas where the non-Muslims were in majority. Eventually it was decided that these two provinces would be bifurcated according to the religious majority at the district or even lower level. This decision could not be made by the midnight of 14-15 August. It meant that a large number of people did not know on the day of Independence whether they were in India or in Pakistan. The partition of these two provinces caused the deepest trauma of Partition. This was related to the fourth and the most intractable of all the problems of partition. This was the problem of  minorities  on both Oh, now I was  East  Bengal has now become Bangladesh. That is why our Bengal is called  West  Bengal! Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              9 sides of the border. Lakhs of Hindus and Sikhs in the areas that were now in Pakistan and an equally large number of Muslims on the Indian side of Punjab and Bengal (and to some extent Delhi and surrounding areas) found themselves trapped. They were to discover that they were undesirable aliens in their own home, in the land where they and their ancestors had lived for centuries. As soon as it became clear that the country was going to be partitioned, the violence started at an unprecedented level against communities who were lesser in number in their respective areas. No one had quite anticipated the scale of this problem. No one had any plans for handling this. Initially, the people and political leaders kept hoping that this violence was temporary and would be controlled soon. But very soon the violence went out of control. Such communities on both sides of the border were often compelled to leave their homes at a few hours  notice. Consequences of partition The year 1947 was the year of one of the largest, most abrupt, unplanned and tragic transfer of population that human history has known. There were killings and atrocities on both sides of the border. In the name of religion people of one community ruthlessly killed and maimed people of the other community. Cities like Lahore, A train full of  refugees  in 1947. 10                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Amritsar and Kolkata became divided into  communal zones. Muslims would avoid going into an area where mainly Hindus or Sikhs lived; similarly the Hindus and Sikhs stayed away from areas of Muslim Forced to abandon their homes and move across borders, people went through immense sufferings. Minorities on both sides of the border fled their home and often secured temporary shelter in  refugee camps. They often found unhelpful local administration and police in what was till recently their own country. They travelled to the other side of the new border by all sorts of means, often by foot.  Even during this journey they were often attacked, killed or raped. Thousands of women were abducted. They were made to convert to the religion of the abductor and were forced into marriage. In many cases women were killed by their own family members to preserve the  family honour. Many children were separated from their parents. Those who did manage to cross the border found that they had no home. For lakhs of these  refugees  the country s freedom meant life in  refugee camps, for months and sometimes Writers, poets and film-makers in India and Pakistan have expressed the ruthlessness of the killings and the suffering violence in their novels, short-stories, poems and films. While recounting the trauma of Partition, they have often used the phrase that the survivors describe partition    as a  division of hearts. not merely a division of properties, liabilities Saadat Hasan Manto Rioters brought the running train to a halt. People belonging to the other community were pulled out and slaughtered with swords The remaining passengers were treated to halwa, fruits and milk. The chief organiser said,  Brothers and sisters, news of this train s arrival was delayed. That is why we have not been able to entertain you lavishly   the way we Source: English translation of Urdu short Gandhi in Noakhali (now in Bangladesh) in 1947. Credit: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              11 and assets, or a political division of the country and the administrative apparatus. What also got divided were the financial assets, and things like tables, chairs, typewriters, paper-clips, books and also musical instruments of the police band! The employees of the government and the railways were also  divided. Above all, it was a violent separation of communities who had hitherto lived together as neighbours. It is estimated that the Partition forced about 80 lakh people to migrate across the new border. Between five to ten lakh people were killed in partition related Beyond the administrative concerns and financial strains, however, the partition posed another deeper issue. The leaders of the Indian national struggle did not believe in the two-nation theory. And yet, partition on religious basis had taken place. Did that make India a Hindu nation automatically? Even after large scale migration of Muslims to the newly created Pakistan, accounted for 10-12 per cent of the total population in 1951. So, how would the government of India treat its Muslim citizens and other religious minorities (Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Buddhists, Parsis and Jews)? The partition had already created severe conflict between the two communities. interests behind these conflicts.  The Muslim League was formed to protect the interests of the Muslims in colonial India. It was in the forefront of the demand for a separate Muslim nation. Similarly, there were organisations, which were trying to organise the Hindus in order to turn India into a Hindu nation. But most leaders of the national movement believed that India must treat persons of all religions Let s watch a Film Salim Mirza, a shoe manufacturer in Agra, increasingly finds himself a stranger amid the people he has lived with all his life.  He feels lost in the emerging reality after partition. His business suffers and a refugee from the other side of partitioned India occupies his ancestral dwelling. His daughter too has a tragic end. He believes that things would soon be normal But many of his family members decide to move to Pakistan. Salim is torn between an impulse to move out to Pakistan and an urge to stay back. A decisive moment comes when Salim witnesses a students  procession demanding His son Sikandar has joined the procession. Can you imagine what Mirza Salim finally did? What do you think you would have done in these circumstances? Director: M.S. Sathyu Screenplay: Kaifi Azmi Actors: Balraj Sahani, Jalal Aga, Farouque Sheikh, Gita Siddharth 12                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Mahatma Gandhi s sacrifice On the 15th August 1947 Mahatma Gandhi did not participate in any of the independence day celebrations. He was in Kolkata in the areas which were torn by gruesome riots between Hindus and Muslims. He was saddened by the communal violence and disheartened that the principles of ahimsa (non-violence) and satyagraha (active but non-violent resistance) that he had lived and worked for, had failed to bind the people in troubled times. Gandhiji went on to persuade the Hindus and Muslims to give up violence. His presence in Kolkata greatly improved the situation, and the coming of independence was celebrated in a spirit of communal harmony, with joyous dancing in the streets. Gandhiji s prayer meetings attracted large crowds. But this was short lived as riots between Hindus and Muslims erupted once again and Gandhiji had to resort to a fast to Next month Gandhiji moved to Delhi where large scale violence had erupted. He was deeply concerned about ensuring that Muslims should be allowed to stay in India with dignity, as equal citizens. He was also concerned about the relations between India and Pakistan. He was unhappy with what he saw as the Indian government s decision not to honour its financial commitments to Pakistan. With all this in mind he undertook what turned out to be his last fast in January 1948. As in Kolkata, his fast had a dramatic effect in Delhi. Communal tension and violence reduced. Muslims of Delhi and surrounding areas could safely return to their homes. The government of India agreed to give Pakistan its dues. Gandhiji s actions were however not liked by all. Extremists in both the communities blamed him for their conditions. Despite this he continued to meet everyone during his prayer meetings. Finally, on 30 January 1948, one such extremist, Nathuram Vinayak Godse, walked up to Gandhiji during his evening  prayer in Delhi and fired three bullets at him, killing him instantly. Thus ended a lifelong struggle for truth, non-violence, justice Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              13 Credit: Sunil Janah The news of Gandhi Ji s assasination drew a crowd in Kolkata. 14                                                                    Politics in India since Independence equally and that India should not be a country that gave superior status to adherents of one faith and inferior to those who practiced another religion. All citizens would be equal irrespective of their religious affiliation.  Being religious or a believer would not be a test of citizenship. They cherished therefore the ideal of a secular nation. This ideal was enshrined in the Indian Constitution. Shweta noticed that her Nana (maternal grandfather) would get very quiet whenever anyone mentioned Pakistan. One day she decided to ask him about it. Her Nana told her about how he moved from Lahore to Ludhiana during partition. Both his parents were killed. Even he would not have survived, but a neighbouring Muslim family gave him shelter and kept him in hiding for several days. They helped him find some relatives and that is how he managed to cross the border and start a new life. Similarly, there are many examples of Hindu families and others who helped, sheltered, and saved the lives of Muslim families during the times of crisis and violence caused by Partition. It shows the importance of compassion and solidarity on religious grounds in both Have you heard a similar story? Ask your grandparents or anyone of that generation about their memories of Independence Day, about the celebration, about the trauma of partition, about the expectations they had from independence. Write down at least two of these stories. Integration of Princely States British India was divided into what were called the British Indian Provinces and the Princely States. The British Indian Provinces were directly under the control of the British government. On the other hand, several large and small states ruled by princes, called the Princely States, enjoyed some form of control over their internal affairs as long as they accepted British supremacy. This was called paramountcy or suzerainty of the British crown. Princely States covered one-third of the land area of the British Indian Empire and one out of four Indians lived under princely rule. Just before Independence it was announced by the British that with the end of their rule over India, paramountcy of the British crown over Princely States would also lapse. This meant that all these states, as many as 565 in all, would become legally independent. The British government took the view that all these states were free to join either India or Pakistan or remain independent if they so wished. This decision was left not to the people but to the princely rulers of these states. This was a very serious problem and could threaten the very existence of a united India. The problems started very soon. First of all, the ruler of Travancore announced that the state had decided on Independence. The Nizam Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              15 Can t we end the partition of India and Pakistan the way they did in Germany? I want to have breakfast in Amritsar and lunch in Lahore! Isn t it better that we now learn to live and respect each other as illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic 16                                                                    Politics in India since Independence of Hyderabad made a similar announcement the next day. Rulers like the Nawab of Bhopal were averse to joining the Constituent Assembly. This response of the rulers of the Princely States meant that after Independence there was a very real possibility that India would get further divided into a number of small countries. The prospects of democracy for the people in these states also looked bleak. This was a strange situation, since the Indian Independence was aimed at unity, self-determination as well as democracy. In most of these princely states, governments were run in a non-democratic manner and the rulers were unwilling to give democratic rights to their populations. The interim government took a firm stance against the possible division of India into small principalities of different sizes. Under the Mountbatten Plan, the Princely states were free to join India or Pakistan. Sardar Patel was India s Deputy Prime Minister and the Home Minister during the crucial period immediately following Independence. He played a historic role in negotiating with the rulers of princely states firmly but diplomatically and bringing most of them into the Indian Union. It may look easy now. But it was a very complicated task which required skilful persuasion. For instance, there were 26 small states in today s Orissa.  Saurashtra region of Gujarat had 14 big states, 119 small states and numerous other The government s approach was guided by three considerations. Firstly, the people of most of the princely states clearly wanted to become part of the Indian union. Secondly, the government was prepared to be flexible in giving autonomy to some regions. The idea was to accommodate plurality and adopt a flexible approach in dealing with the demands of the regions. Thirdly, in the backdrop of partition which brought into focus the contest over demarcation of territory, the integration and consolidation of the territorial boundaries of the nation had assumed supreme importance. Before 15 August 1947, peaceful negotiations had brought almost all states whose territories were contiguous to the new boundaries of India, into the Indian Union. The rulers of most of the states signed a document called the  Instrument of Accession  which meant that their state agreed to become a part of the Union of India. Accession of the Princely States of Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir and Manipur proved more difficult than the rest. The issue of Junagarh was resolved after a plebiscite confirmed people s desire to join India.  You will read about Kashmir in Chapter Seven. Here, let us look at the cases of Hyderabad and Manipur. We are at a momentous stage in the history of India. By common endeavour, we can raise the country to new greatness, while lack of unity will expose us to unexpected calamities. I hope the Indian States will realise fully that if we do not cooperate and work together in the general interest, anarchy and chaos will overwhelm us all, great and small, and lead us to Letter to Princely rulers, Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              17 Hyderabad, the largest of the Princely States was surrounded entirely by Indian territory. Some parts of the old Hyderabad state are today parts of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Its ruler carried the title,  Nizam, and he was one of the world s richest men. The Nizam wanted an independent status for Hyderabad. He entered into what was called the Standstill Agreement with India in November 1947 for a year while negotiations with the Indian government were going on. In the meantime, a movement of the people of Hyderabad State against the Nizam s rule gathered force. The peasantry in the Telangana region in particular, was the victim of Nizam s oppressive rule and rose against him. Women who had seen the worst of this oppression joined the movement in large numbers. Hyderabad town was the nerve centre of this movement. The Communists and the Hyderabad Congress were in the forefront of the movement. The Nizam responded by unleashing a para-military force known as the Razakars on the people. The atrocities and communal nature of the Razakars knew no bounds. They Sardar Patel with the Nizam of Hyderabad Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel (1875-1950): Leader of the freedom movement; Congress leader; follower of Mahatma Gandhi;  Deputy Prime Minister and first Home Minister of independent India; played an important role in the integration of Princely States with India; member of important committees of the Constituent Assembly on Fundamental Rights, 18                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India murdered, maimed, raped and looted, targeting particularly the non- Muslims. The central government had to order the army to tackle the situation. In September 1948, Indian army moved in to control the Nizam s forces. After a few days of intermittent fighting, the Nizam surrendered. This led to Hyderabad s accession to India. A few days before Independence, the Maharaja of Manipur, Bodhachandra Singh, signed the Instrument of Accession with the Indian government on the assurance that the internal autonomy of Manipur would be maintained. Under the pressure of public opinion, the Maharaja held elections in Manipur in June 1948 and the state became a constitutional monarchy. Thus Manipur was the first part of India to hold an election based on universal adult franchise. In the Legislative Assembly of Manipur there were sharp differences over the question of merger of Manipur with India. While the state Congress wanted the merger, other political parties were opposed to this. The Government of India succeeded in persuading the Maharaja into signing a Merger Agreement in September 1949. I wonder what happened to all of kings, queens, did they live their lives after comments on the the people and the rulers in the and also on to resolving this Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              19 Reorganisation of States The process of nation-building did not come to an end with partition and integration of Princely States. Now the challenge was to draw the internal boundaries of the Indian states. This was not just a matter of administrative divisions.  The boundaries had to be drawn in a way so that the linguistic and cultural plurality of the country could be reflected without affecting the unity of the nation. During colonial rule, the state boundaries were drawn either on administrative convenience or simply coincided with the territories annexed by the British government or the territories ruled by the Our national movement had rejected these divisions as artificial and had promised the linguistic principle as the basis of formation of states. In fact after the Nagpur session of Congress in 1920 the principle was recognised as the basis of the reorganisation of the Indian National Congress party itself.  Many Provincial Congress Committees were created by linguistic zones, which did not follow the administrative divisions of British India. Things changed after Independence and partition. Our leaders felt that carving out states on the basis of language might lead to disruption and disintegration. It was also felt that this would draw attention away from other social and economic challenges that the country faced. The central leadership decided to postpone matters. The need for postponement was also felt because the fate of the Princely States had not been decided. Also, the memory of partition was still fresh. This decision of the national leadership was challenged by the local leaders and the people. Protests began in the Telugu speaking areas of (as the movement for a separate Andhra was called) demanded that the Telugu speaking areas should be separated from the Madras province of which they were a part and be made into a separate Andhra province. Nearly all the political forces in the Andhra region were in favour of linguistic reorganisation of the then Madras province. The movement gathered momentum as a result of the Central government s vacillation. Potti Sriramulu, a Congress leader and a veteran Gandhian, went on an indefinite fast that led to his death after 56 days. This caused great unrest and resulted in violent outbursts in Andhra region. People in large numbers took to the streets. Many were injured or lost their lives in police firing.  In Madras, several legislators resigned their seats in protest. Finally, the Prime Minister announced the formation of a separate Andhra state in December 1952. provinces are formed, it will also give a fillip to the regional languages. It would be absurd to make Hindustani the medium of instruction in all the regions and it is still more absurd to use English for 20                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Read the map and answer the following questions: 1.	 Name the original state from which the following states were carved out: 2.	 Name two states that were affected by the partition of the country. 3.	 Name two states today that were once a Union Territory. Note:	This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India s external boundaries. Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              21 The formation of Andhra spurred the struggle for making of other states on linguistic lines in other parts of the country. These struggles forced the Central Government into appointing a States Reorganisation Commission in 1953 to look into the question of redrawing of the boundaries of states. The Commission in its report accepted that the boundaries of the state should reflect the boundaries of different languages.  On the basis of its report the States Reorganisation Act was passed in 1956.  This led to the creation of 14 states and six union territories. Now, isn t this very interesting? Nehru and other leaders were very popular, and yet the people did not hesitate to agitate for linguistic states against the wishes of the leaders! worker; left government job to participate in Salt Satyagraha; also participated in individual Satyagraha; went on a fast in 1946 demanding that temples in Madras province be opened to dalits; undertook a fast unto death from 19 October 1952 demanding separate state of Andhra; died during the fast on 15 December 1952.  Struggle for Survival  (26 July 1953) captures contemporary impression of the demand for linguistic states 22                                                                    Politics in India since Independence One of the most important concerns in the early years was that demands for separate states would endanger the unity of the country. It was felt that linguistic states may foster separatism and create pressures on the newly founded nation. But the leadership, under popular pressure, finally made a choice in favour of linguistic states. It was hoped that if we accept the regional and linguistic claims of all regions, the threat of division and separatism would be reduced. Besides, the accommodation of regional demands and the formation of linguistic states were also seen as more democratic. Now it is more than fifty years since the formation of linguistic states. We can say that linguistic states and the movements for the formation of these states changed the nature of democratic politics and leadership in some basic ways. The path to politics and power was now open to people other than the small English speaking elite. Linguistic reorganisation also gave some uniform basis to the drawing of state boundaries. It did not lead  Coaxing the Genie back  (5 February 1956) asked if the State Reorganisation Commission could contain the genie of linguism. Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              23 to disintegration of the country as many had feared earlier. On the contrary it strengthened national unity. Above all, the linguistic states underlined the acceptance of the principle of diversity. When we say that India adopted democracy, it does not simply mean that India embraced a democratic constitution, nor does it merely mean that India adopted the format of elections. The choice was larger than that. It was a choice in favour of recognising and accepting the existence of differences which could at times be oppositional.  Democracy, in other words, was associated with plurality of ideas and ways of life.  Much of the politics in the later period was to take place within this framework. Fast Forward   Creation of new states The acceptance of the principle of linguistic states did not mean, however, that all states immediately became linguistic states. There was an experiment of  bilingual  Bombay state, consisting of Gujarati- and Marathi-speaking people. After a popular agitation, the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat were created in 1960. In Punjab also, there were two linguistic groups: Hindi-speaking and Punjabi-speaking. The Punjabi-speaking people demanded a separate state. But it was not granted with other states in 1956. Statehood for Punjab came ten years later, in 1966, when the territories of today s Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were separated from the larger Punjab state. Another major reorganisation of states took place in the north-east in 1972. Meghalaya was carved out of Assam in 1972.  Manipur and Tripura too emerged as separate states in the same year. The states of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh came into being in 1987. Nagaland had become a state much earlier in 1963. Language did not, however, remain the sole basis of organisation of states. In later years sub-regions raised demands for separate states on the basis of a separate regional culture or complaints of regional imbalance in development. Three such states, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand, were created in 2000. Telangana has emerged as a new state on 2 June, 2014. The story of reorganisation has not come to an end. There are many regions in the country where there are movements demanding separate and smaller states. These include Vidarbha in Maharashtra, Harit Pradesh in the western region of Uttar Pradesh and the northern region of West Bengal. The US has one-fourth of our population but 50 states. Why can t India have more than 100 24                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Which among the following statements about the partition is incorrect? Partition of India was the outcome of the  two-nation theory.  Punjab and Bengal were the two provinces divided on the basis East Pakistan and West Pakistan were not contiguous. The scheme of partition included a plan for transfer of population across the border. Match the principles with the instances: Mapping of boundaries i. 	 Pakistan and on religious grounds Mapping of boundaries on grounds ii.	 India and of different languages Demarcating boundaries within a iii.	 Jharkhand and country by geographical zones Demarcating boundaries within a iv.	 Himachal Pradesh country on administrative and Take a current political map of India (showing outlines of states) and mark the location of  the following Princely States. Here are two opinions   Bismay:  The merger with the Indian State was an extension of democracy to the people of the Princely States.  Inderpreet:  I am not so sure, there was force being used. Democracy comes by creating consensus.  What is your own opinion in the light of accession of Princely States and the responses of the people in these parts? Read the following very different statements made in August 1947    Today you have worn on your heads a crown of thorns. The seat of power is a nasty thing. You have to remain ever wakeful on that seat. you have to be more humble and forbearing now there will be no end to your being tested.     M.K Gandhi  India will awake to a life of freedom.we step out from the old to the new we end today a period of ill fortune and India discovers herself again. The achievement we celebrate today is but a step, an opening of opportunity     Jawaharlal Nehru Spell out the agenda of nation building that flows from these two statements. Which one appeals more to you and why? 24                                                                    Politics in India since Independence Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              25 What are the reasons being used by Nehru for keeping India secular? Do you think these reasons were only ethical and sentimental? Or were there some prudential reasons as well? Bring out two major differences between the challenge of nation building for eastern and western regions of the country at the time of What was the task of the States Reorganisation Commission? What was its most salient recommendation? It is said that the nation is to a large extent an   imagined community  held together by common beliefs, history, political aspirations and imaginations. Identify the features that make India a nation. 10.  Read the following passage and answer the questions below:  In the history of nation-building only the Soviet experiment bears comparison with the Indian. There too, a sense of unity had to be forged between many diverse ethnic groups, religious, linguistic communities and social classes. The scale   geographic as well as demographic   was comparably massive. The raw material the state had to work with was equally unpropitious: a people divided by faith and driven by debt and disease.     Ramachandra Guha List the commonalities that the author mentions between India and Soviet Union and give one example for each of these from The author does not talk about dissimilarities between the two experiments. Can you mention two dissimilarities? In retrospect which of these two experiments worked better and LET US DO IT TOGETHER Read a novel/ story on partition by an Indian and a Pakistani/ Bangladeshi writer. What are the commonalities of the experience across the border? Collect all the stories from the  Let s Research  suggestion in this chapter. Prepare a wallpaper that highlights the common experiences and has stories on the unique experiences. Challenges of Nation Building                                                                              25 In this chapter  The challenge of nation-building, covered in the last chapter, was accompanied by the challenge of instituting democratic politics. Thus, electoral competition among political parties began immediately after Independence. In this chapter, we look at the first decade of electoral politics in order to understand the establishment of a system of free and fair elections; the domination of the Congress party in the years immediately after Independence; and the emergence of opposition parties and their policies. This famous sketch by Shankar appeared on the cover of his collection   Don t Spare Me, Shankar. The original sketch was drawn in the context of India s China policy. But this cartoon captures the dual role of the Congress during the era of one-party dominance. Challenge of building democracy You now have an idea of the difficult circumstances in which independent India was born. You have read about the serious challenge of nation-building that confronted the country right in the beginning. Faced with such serious challenges, leaders in many other countries of the world decided that their country could not afford to have democracy. They said that national unity was their first priority and that democracy will introduce differences and conflicts. Therefore many of the countries that gained freedom from colonialism experienced non-democratic rule. It took various forms: nominal democracy but effective control by one leader, one party rule or direct army rule. Non-democratic regimes always started with a promise of restoring democracy very soon. But once they established themselves, it was very difficult to dislodge them. The conditions in India were not very different. But the leaders of the newly independent India decided to take the more difficult path. Any other path would have been surprising, for our freedom struggle was deeply committed to the idea of democracy. Our leaders were conscious of the critical role of politics in any democracy. They did not see politics as a problem; they saw it as a way of solving the problems. Every society needs to decide how it will govern and regulate itself. There are always different policy alternatives to choose from. There are different groups with different and conflicting aspirations. How do we resolve these differences? Democratic politics is an answer to this question. While competition and power are the two most visible things about politics, the purpose of political activity is and should be deciding and pursuing public interest. This is the route our leaders decided to take. Last year you studied how our Constitution was drafted. You would remember that the Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949 and signed on 24 January 1950 and it came into effect on 26 January 1950. At that time the country was being ruled by an interim government. It was now necessary to install the first democratically elected government of the country. The Constitution had laid down the rules, now the machine had to be put in place. Initially it was thought that this was only a matter of a few months. The Election Commission of India was set up in January 1950. Sukumar Sen became the first Chief Election Commissioner. The country s first general elections were expected sometime in 1950 itself. What s so special about our being a or later every country has become a democracy, isn t it?  hero-worship, plays a part in its politics unequalled in magnitude by the part it plays in the politics of any other country.But in politics,....hero-worship is a sure road to degradation and Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Speech in Constituent 25 November 1949 era of one-party 28                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence A cartoonist s impression of the election committee formed by the Congress to choose party candidates in 1951. On the committee, besides Nehru: Morarji Desai, Rafi  Ahmed Kidwai, Dr B.C. Roy, Kamaraj Nadar, Rajagopalachari, Jagjivan Ram, Maulana Azad, D.P. Mishra, P.D. Tandon and Govind Ballabh Pant. But the Election Commission discovered that it was not going to be easy to hold a free and fair election in a country of India s size. Holding an election required delimitation or drawing the boundaries of the electoral constituencies. It also required preparing the electoral rolls, or the list of all the citizens eligible to vote. Both these tasks took a lot of time. When the first draft of the rolls was published, it was discovered that the names of nearly 40 lakh women were not recorded in the list. They were simply listed as  wife of   or  daughter of. The Election Commission refused to accept these entries and ordered a revision if possible and deletion if necessary. Preparing for the first general election  was a mammoth exercise.  No election  on this scale had ever been conducted  in the world before. At that time there were 17 crore eligible voters, who had to elect about 3,200 MLAs and 489 Members of Lok Sabha. Only 15 per cent of these eligible voters were literate. Therefore the Election Commission had to think of some special method of voting. The Election Commission trained over 3 lakh officers and polling staff to conduct the elections. It was not just the size of the country and the electorate that made this election unusual. The first general election was also the first big test of democracy in  a poor and illiterate country. Till then democracy had existed only in the prosperous countries, mainly in Europe and North America, where nearly everyone was literate. By that time many countries in Europe had not given voting rights to all women. In this context India s experiment with universal adult franchise That was a good decision. But what about men who still refer to a woman as Mrs. somebody, as if she does not have a name of her own? Credit: Shankar, 20 May 1951 Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    29 Ask the elders in your family and neighbourhood about their experience of participating in elections. Did anyone vote in the first or second general election? Who did they vote for and why? Is there someone who has used all the three methods of voting? Which one did they prefer? In which ways do they find the elections of those days different from the present ones? Changing methods of voting These days we use an Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) to record voters  preferences. But that is not how we started. In the first general election, it was decided to place inside each polling booth a box for each candidate with the election symbol of that candidate. Each voter was given a blank ballot paper which they had to drop into the box of the candidate they wanted to vote for. About 20 lakh steel boxes were used for this purpose. A presiding officer from Punjab described how he A sample of the the third to elections to Lok prepared the ballot boxes Each box had to have its candidate s symbol, both inside and outside it, and outside on either side, had to be displayed the name of the candidate in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi along with the number of the constituency, the polling station and the polling booth. The paper seal with the numerical description of the candidate, signed by the presiding officer, had to be inserted in the token frame and its window closed by its door which had to be fixed in its place at the other end by means of a wire. All this had to be done on the day previous to the one fixed for polling. To fix symbols and labels the boxes had first to be rubbed with sandpaper or a piece of brick. I found that it took about five hours for six persons, including my two daughters, to complete this work. All this was done at my house.  After the first two elections, this method was changed. Now the ballot paper carried the names and symbols of all the candidates and the voter was required to put a stamp on the name of the candidate they wanted to vote for. This method worked for nearly forty years. Towards the end of 1990s the Election Commission started using the EVM. By 2004 the entire country had shifted to the EVM. 30                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence appeared very bold and risky. An Indian editor called it  the biggest gamble in history.  Organiser, a magazine, wrote that Jawaharlal Nehru  would live to confess the failure of universal adult franchise in India. A British member of the Indian Civil Service claimed that  a future and more enlightened age will view with astonishment the absurd farce of recording the votes of millions of illiterate people. The elections had to be postponed twice and finally held from October 1951 to February 1952. But this election is referred to as the 1952 election since most parts of the country voted in January 1952. It took six months for the campaigning, polling and counting to be completed. Elections were competitive   there were on an average more than four candidates for each seat. The level of participation was encouraging   more than half the eligible voters turned out to vote on the day of elections. When the results were declared these were accepted as fair even by the losers. The Indian experiment had proved the critics wrong. The Times of India held that the polls have  confounded all those sceptics who thought the introduction of adult franchise too risky an experiment in this country. The Hindustan Times claimed that  there is universal agreement that the Indian people have conducted themselves admirably in the largest experiment in democratic elections in the history of the world. Observers outside India were equally impressed. India s general election of 1952 became a landmark in the history of democracy all over the world. It was no longer possible to argue that democratic elections could not be held in conditions of poverty or lack of education. It proved that democracy could be practiced anywhere in the world. Maulana Abul Kalam original name   Abul Ahmed; scholar of Islam; freedom fighter and Congress leader; proponent of Hindu- Muslim unity; opposed to Partition; member of Education Minister in the first cabinet of  free Congress dominance in the first  three The results of the first general election did not surprise anyone. The Indian National Congress was expected to win this election. The Congress party, as it was popularly known, had inherited the legacy of the national movement. It was the only party then to have an organisation spread all over the country. And finally, in Jawaharlal Nehru, the party had the most popular and charismatic leader in Indian politics. He led the Congress campaign and toured through the country. When the final results were declared, the extent of the victory of the Congress did surprise many. The party won 364 of the 489 seats in the first Lok Sabha and finished way ahead of any other challenger. The Communist Party of India that came next in terms of seats won only 16 seats. The state elections were held with the Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    31 Can you identify the places where the Congress had a strong presence? In which States, did the other parties perform reasonably well? Note:	This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India s external boundaries. 32                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence Lok Sabha elections. The Congress scored big victory in those elections as well. It won a majority of seats in all the states except Travancore-Cochin (part of today s Kerala), Madras and Orissa. Finally even in these states the Congress formed the government. So the party ruled all over the country at the national and the state level. As expected, Jawaharlal Nehru became the Prime Minister after the first general election. A look at the electoral map on the previous page would give you a sense of the dominance of the Congress during the period 1952-1962. In the second and the third general elections, held in 1957 and 1962 respectively,  the Congress maintained the same position in the Lok Sabha by winning three-fourth of the seats. None of the opposition parties could win even one-tenth of the number of seats won by the Congress. In the state assembly elections, the Congress did not get majority in a few cases. The most significant of these cases was in Kerala in 1957 when a coalition led by the CPI formed the government. Apart from exceptions like this, the Congress controlled the national and all the state governments. The extent of the victory of the Congress was artificially boosted by our electoral system. The Congress won three out of every four seats but it did not get even half of the votes. In 1952, for example, the Congress obtained 45 per cent of the total votes. But it managed to win 74 per cent of the seats. The Socialist Party, the second largest party in terms of votes, secured more than 10 per cent of the votes all over the country. But it could not even win three per cent of the seats. How did this happen? For this, you need to recall the discussion about the first-past- the-post method in your textbook, Indian Constitution at Work In this system of election, that has been adopted in our country, the party that gets more votes than others tends to get much more than its proportional share. That is exactly what worked in favour of the Congress. If we add up the votes of all the non-Congress candidates it was more than the votes of the Congress. But the non-Congress votes were divided between different rival parties and candidates. So the Congress was still way ahead of the opposition and managed to win. Rajkumari Amrit Kaur (1889-1964): A Gandhian and  Freedom fighter; belonged to the royal family of Kapurthala; religion from her mother; member of Constituent Assembly; Minister for Health in independent India s first ministry; continued as Health Minister till 1957. Credit: The Hindu Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    33 Communist victory in Kerala As early as in 1957, the Congress party had the bitter taste of defeat in Kerala. In the assembly elections held in March 1957, the Communist Party won the largest number of seats in the Kerala legislature. The party won 60 of the 126 seats and had the support of five independents. The governor invited E. M. S. Namboodiripad, the leader of the Communist legislature party, to form the ministry.  For the first time in the world, a Communist party government had come to power through democratic elections. On losing power in the State, the Congress party began a  liberation struggle  against the elected government. The CPI had come to power on the promise of carrying out radical and progressive policy measures. The Communists claimed that the agitation was led by vested interests and religious organisations. In 1959 the Congress government at the Centre dismissed the Communist government in Kerala under Article 356 of the Constitution. This decision proved very controversial and was widely cited as one of the prominent instances of the misuse of constitutional emergency powers. E.M.S. Namboodiripad, leading a procession of Communist Party workers, after his ministry was dismissed from office in Trivandrum in August 34                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence The origins of the Socialist Party can be traced back to the mass movement stage of the Indian National Congress in the pre-independence era. The Congress Socialist party (CSP) was formed within the Congress in 1934 by a group of young leaders who wanted a more radical and egalitarian Congress. In 1948, the Congress amended its constitution to prevent its members from having a dual party membership. This forced the Socialists to form a separate Socialist Party in 1948. The Party s electoral performance caused much disappointment to its supporters. Although the Party had presence in most of the states of India, it could achieve electoral success only in a few pockets. the ideology of democratic socialism which distinguished them both from the Congress as well as from the Communists. They criticised the Congress for favouring capitalists and landlords and for ignoring the workers and the peasants. But the socialists faced a dilemma when in 1955 the Congress declared its goal to be the socialist pattern of society. Thus it became difficult for the socialists to present themselves as an effective alternative to the Congress. Some of them, led by Rammanohar Lohia, increased their distance from and criticism of the Congress party. Some others like Asoka Mehta advocated a limited cooperation with the Congress. The Socialist Party went through many splits and reunions leading to the formation of many socialist parties. These included the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party, the Praja Socialist Party and Samyukta Socialist Party. Jayaprakash Narayan, Achyut Patwardhan, Asoka Mehta, Acharya Narendra Dev, Rammanohar Lohia and S.M. Joshi were among the leaders of the socialist parties. Many parties in contemporary India, like the Samajwadi Party, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata Dal (United) and the Janata Dal (Secular) trace their origins to the Socialist Party. Socialist Party (SP) Freedom fighter and founding President of the Congress Socialist Party; jailed several times during the active in peasants  movement; a scholar of Buddhism; after independence led the Socialist Party and later the Praja Socialist 34                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    35 Nature of Congress dominance India is not the only country to have experienced the dominance of one party. If we look around the world, we find many other examples Babasaheb Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar (1891-1956): Leader of the anti-caste movement and the struggle for justice to the Dalits; scholar and intellectual; founder of Independent Labour Party; later founded the Scheduled Castes Federation; planned the formation of the Republican Party of India; Member of Viceroy s Executive Council during the Second World War;  Chairman, Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly; Minister in Nehru s first cabinet after independence; resigned in 1951 due to differences over the Hindu Code Bill; adopted Buddhism in 1956, with thousands of followers. of one-party dominance. But there is a crucial difference between these and the Indian experience. In the rest of the cases the dominance of one party was ensured by compromising democracy. In some countries like China, Cuba and Syria the constitution permits only a single party to rule the country. Some others like Myanmar, Belarus, Egypt, and Eritrea are effectively one-party states due to legal and military measures. Until a few years ago, Mexico, South Korea and Taiwan were also effectively one-party dominant states. What distinguished the dominance of the Congress party in India from all these cases was it happened under democratic conditions. Many parties contested elections in conditions of free and fair elections and yet the Congress managed to win election after election. This was similar to the dominance the African National Congress has enjoyed in South Africa after the end of apartheid. The roots of this extraordinary success of the Congress party go back to the legacy of the freedom struggle. Congress was seen as inheritor of the national movement. Many leaders who were in the as Congress candidates. The Congress was already a very well-organised party and by the time the other parties could even think of a strategy, the Congress 36                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence Earlier we had coalition in a party, now we have coalition of parties. Does it mean that we have had a coalition had already started its campaign. In fact, many parties were formed only around independence or after that. Thus, the Congress had the  first off the blocks  advantage.  By the time of independence the party had not only spread across the length and breadth of the country as we had seen in the maps but also had an organisational network down to the local level. Most importantly, as the Congress was till recently a national movement, its nature was all-inclusive. All these factors contributed to the dominance of the Congress party. Congress as social and ideological coalition You have already studied the history of how Congress evolved from its origins in 1885 as a pressure group for the newly educated, professional and commercial classes to a mass movement in the twentieth century. This laid the basis for its eventual transformation into a mass political party and its subsequent domination of the political system. Thus the Congress began as a party dominated by urban elite. But with every civil disobedience movement it launched, its social base widened. It brought together diverse groups, whose interests were often contradictory. Peasants and industrialists, urban dwellers and villagers, workers and owners, middle, lower and upper classes and castes, all found space in the Congress. Gradually, its leadership also expanded beyond the upper caste and upper class professionals to agriculture based leaders with a rural orientation. By the time of independence, the Congress was transformed into a rainbow-like social coalition broadly representing India s diversity in terms of classes and castes, religions and languages and various interests. Many of these groups merged their identity within the Congress. Very often they did not and continued to exist within the Congress as groups and individuals holding different beliefs. In this sense the Congress was an ideological coalition as well. It accommodated the revolutionary and pacifist, conservative and radical, extremist and moderate and the right, left and all shades of the centre. The Congress was a  platform  for numerous groups, interests and even political parties to take part in the national movement. In pre-independence days, many organisations and parties with their own constitution and organisational structure were allowed to exist within the Congress. Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Congress leader from U.P.; Minister in  U.P. in 1937 and again in 1946; Minister for the first ministry of free India; Food and Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    37 In the early 1920s communist groups emerged in different parts of India taking inspiration from the Bolshevik revolution in Russia and advocating socialism as the solution to problems affecting the country. From 1935, the Communists worked mainly from within the fold of the Indian National Congress.  A parting of ways took place in December 1941, when the Communists decided to support the British in their war against Nazi Germany. Unlike other non- Congress parties the CPI had a well-oiled party machinery and dedicated cadre at the time of independence. However, independence raised different voices in the party. The basic question that troubled the party was the nature of Indian independence. Was India really free or was freedom a sham? Soon after independence, the party thought that the transfer of power in 1947 was not  true independence and encouraged violent uprisings in Telangana. The Communists failed to generate popular support for their position and were crushed by the armed forces.  This forced them to rethink their position. In 1951 the Communist Party abandoned the path of violent revolution and decided to participate in the approaching general elections. In the first general election, CPI won 16 seats and emerged as the largest opposition party. The party s support was more concentrated in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar and Kerala. A. K. Gopalan, S.A. Dange, E.M.S. Namboodiripad, P.C. Joshi, Ajay Ghosh and P. Sundarraya were among the notable leaders of the CPI. The Party went through a major split in 1964 following  the ideological rift between Soviet Union and China. The pro-Soviet faction remained as the CPI, while the opponents formed the CPI(M). Both these parties continue to exist to this day. The Communist Party of India (CPI) leader from Kerala, worked as a Congress worker initially; joined the Communist Party in 1939; after the split in the Communist Party in 1964, joined the CPI (M) and worked for strengthening the party; respected as a of Parliament from 1952. Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                   37 38                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence Some of these, like the Congress Socialist Party, later separated from the Congress and became opposition parties. Despite differences regarding the methods, specific programmes and policies the party managed to contain if not resolve differences and build a Tolerance and management This coalition-like character of the Congress gave it an unusual strength. Firstly, a coalition accommodates all those who join it. Therefore, it has to avoid any extreme position and strike a balance on almost all issues. Compromise and inclusiveness are the hallmarks of a coalition. This strategy put the opposition in a difficulty. Anything that the opposition wanted to say, would also find a place in the programme and ideology of the Congress.  Secondly, in a party that has the nature of a coalition, there is a greater tolerance of internal differences and ambitions of various groups and leaders are accommodated. The Congress did both these things during the freedom struggle and continued doing this even after Independence. That is why, even if a group was not happy with the position of the party or with its share of power, it would remain inside the party and fight the other groups rather than leaving the party and becoming an  opposition. These groups inside the party are called factions. The coalitional nature of the Congress party tolerated and in fact encouraged various factions. Some of these factions were based very often these factions were rooted in personal ambitions and rivalries. Instead of being a weakness, internal factionalism became a strength of Let s watch a Film This Marathi film, based on Arun Sadhu s two novels  Simhasan  and  Mumbai Dinank, depicts the tussle for the post of Chief Minister in Maharashtra. The story is told through journalist Digu Tipnis  as the silent  Sutradhar. It tries to capture the intense power struggle within the ruling party and the secondary role of the Dabhade is making all-out efforts to unseat the incumbent Chief Minister. Both contenders are trying to woo trade union leader D Casta  to obtain his support. In this factional fight, other politicians too seek to obtain maximum advantage while bargaining with both sides. Smuggling in Mumbai and the grim social reality in rural Maharashtra form the sub-plots in Director: Jabbar Patel Screenplay: Vijay Tendulkar Cast: Nilu Phule, Arun Sarnaik, Dr.Shreeram Lagoo, Satish Dubashi, Datta Bhat, Madhukar Toradmal, Madhav Watve, Mohan Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    39 The Bharatiya Jana Sangh was formed in 1951 with Shyama Prasad Mukherjee as its founder- President. Its lineage however can be traced back to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and the Hindu Mahasabha The Jana Sangh was different from other parties in terms of ideology and programmes. It emphasised the idea of one country, one culture and one nation and believed that the country could progressive and strong on the basis of Indian culture and traditions. The party called for a reunion of India and Pakistan in Akhand Bharat. The party was in forefront of the agitation to replace English with Hindi as the official language of India and was also opposed to the granting of concessions to religious and cultural minorities.  The party was a consistent advocate of India developing nuclear weapons especially after China carried out its atomic tests in 1964. In the 1950s Jana Sangh remained on the margins of the electoral politics and was able to secure only 3 Lok Sabha seats in 1952 elections and 4 seats in 1957 general elections to Lok Sabha. In the early years its support came mainly from the urban areas in the Hindi speaking states like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. The party s leaders included Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya and Balraj Madhok. The Bharatiya Janata Party traces its roots to the Bharatiya Jana Sangh. Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS) time RSS worker since 1942; founder member of the later President of Sangh; initiated the concept of integral Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                   39 40                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence the Congress. Since there was room within the party for various factions to fight with each other, it meant that leaders representing different interests and ideologies remained within the Congress rather than go out and form a new party. Most of the state units of the Congress were made up of numerous factions. The factions took different ideological positions making the Congress appear as a grand centrist party. The other parties primarily attempted to influence these factions and thereby indirectly influenced policy and decision making from the  margins. They were far removed from the actual exercise of authority. They were not alternatives to the ruling party; instead they constantly pressurised and criticised, censured and influenced the Congress. The system of factions functioned as balancing mechanism within the ruling party. Political competition therefore took place within the Congress. In that sense, in the first decade of electoral competition the Congress acted both as the ruling party as well as the opposition. That is why this period of Indian politics has been described as the Emergence of opposition parties I thought factions were a disease that needed to be cured. You make it sound as if factions are normal and good. As we have noted above, it is not that India did not have opposition parties during this period. While discussing the results of the elections, we have already come across the names of many parties other than the Congress. Even then India had a larger number of diverse and vibrant opposition parties than many other multi-party democracies. Some of these had come into being even before the first general election of 1952. Some of these parties played an important part in the politics of the country in the  sixties and  seventies. The roots of almost all the non-Congress parties of today can be traced to one or the other of the opposition parties of the 1950s. All these opposition parties succeeded in gaining only a token representation in the Lok Sabha and state assemblies during this period. Yet their presence played a crucial role in maintaining the democratic character of the system. These parties offered a sustained and often principled criticism of the policies and practices of the Congress party. This kept the ruling party under check and often changed the balance of power within the Congress. By keeping democratic political alternative alive,  Tug of War  (29 August 1954) is a cartoonist s impression of the relative strength of the opposition and the government. Sitting on the tree are Nehru and his cabinet colleagues. Trying to topple the tree are opposition leaders A. K. Gopalan, Acharya Kripalani, N.C. Chatterjee, Srikantan Nair and Sardar Hukum Singh. Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    41 these parties prevented the resentment with the system from turning anti-democratic. These parties also groomed the leaders who were to play a crucial role in the shaping of our country. In the early years there was a lot of mutual respect between the leaders of the Congress and those of the opposition. The interim government that ruled the country after the declaration of Independence and the first general election included opposition leaders like Dr. Ambedkar and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in the cabinet. Jawaharlal Nehru often referred to his fondness for the Socialist Party and invited socialist leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan to join his government. This kind of personal relationship with and respect for political adversaries declined after the party competition grew more intense. Thus this first phase of democratic politics in our country was quite unique.  The inclusive character of the national movement led by the Congress enabled it to attract different sections, groups and interests making it a broad based social and ideological Nehru s Cabinet after the swearing-in of Chakravarti Rajagopalachari as Governor-General in 1948. Sitting from left to right: Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, Baldev Singh, Maulana Azad, Prime Minister Nehru, Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Mr. John Matthai and Jagjivan Ram. Standing from left to right: Mr. Gadgil, Mr. Neogi, Dr. Ambedkar, Shyama Prasad Mukherji, Mr. Gopalaswamy Iyengar and Mr. Jayramdas Daulatram. election is considered (by Congress members) more important than my presence in the Govt or the Congress........I have completely exhausted my utility both in the Congress in a letter to Rajaji, after the election of Tandon as Congress president against his wishes. 42                                                                         Politics in India sinc Independence Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (1901-1953): Leader of Hindu Mahasabha;  founder of Bharatiya Jana Sangh; Minister in Nehru s first cabinet after independence; resigned in 1950 due to differences over relations with Pakistan; Member of Constituent Assembly and later, the first Lok Sabha; was opposed to India s policy of autonomy to Jammu & Kashmir; arrested during Jana Sangh s agitation against Kashmir policy; died coalition. The key role of the Congress in the freedom struggle thus gave it a head start over others. As the ability of the Congress to accommodate all interests and all aspirants for political power steadily declined, other political parties started gaining greater significance. Thus, Congress dominance constitutes only one phase in the politics of the country. We shall come to the other phases in later parts of this textbook. Choose the correct option to fill in the blanks. (a)	 The First General Elections in 1952 involved simultaneous elections to the Lok Sabha and.(The President of India/ State Assemblies/ Rajya Sabha/ The Prime Minister) (b) The party that won the second largest number of Lok Sabha seats in the first elections was the.(Praja Socialist Party/ Bharatiya Jana Sangh/ Communist Party of India/Bharatiya Janata (c)	 One of the guiding principles of the ideology of the Swatantra Party was.(Working class interests/ protection of Princely States / economy free from State control / Autonomy of States within the Union) Match the following leaders listed in List A with the parties in List B. List A                                                  List B S. A. Dange Bharatiya Jana Sangh Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Praja Socialist Party Communist Party of India Four statements regarding one- party dominance are given below. Mark each of them as true or false. (a)	 One-party dominance is rooted in the absence of strong alternative (b)	 One-party dominance occurs because of weak public opinion. One-party dominance is linked to the nation s colonial past. (d)	 One-party dominance reflects the absence of democratic ideals in Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                    43 Take a political map of India (with State outlines) and mark: (a) two states where Congress was not in power at some point (b) two states where the Congress remained in power through Read the following passage and answer the questions below:  Patel, the organisational man of the Congress, wanted to purge the Congress of other political groups and sought to make of it a cohesive and disciplined political party. He. sought to take the Congress away from its all-embracing character and turn it into a close-knit party of disciplined cadres. Being a  realist  he looked more for discipline than for comprehension. While Gandhi took too romantic a view of  carrying on the movement,  Patel s idea of transforming the Congress into strictly political party with a single ideology and tight discipline showed an equal lack of understanding of the eclectic role that the Congress, as a government, was to be called upon to perform in the decades to follow.      Rajni Kothari (a) Why does the author think that Congress should not have been a cohesive and disciplined party? (b) Give some examples of the eclectic role of the Congress party in the early years. Why does the author say that Gandhi s view about Congress  future was romantic? LET US DO IT TOGETHER Make a chart of elections and governments in your State since 1952. The chart could have the following columns: year of election, name of the winning party, name of ruling party or parties, name of the Chief Era of One-party Dominance                                                                                   43 In this chapter  In the last two chapters we have studied how the leaders of independent India responded to the challenges of nation-building and establishing democracy. Let us now turn to the third challenge, that of economic development to ensure well-being of all. As in the case of the first two challenges, our leaders chose a path that was different and difficult. In this case their success was much more limited, for this challenge was tougher and more enduring. In this chapter, we study the story of political choices involved in some of the key questions of economic development. What were the key choices and debates about development? Which strategy was adopted by our leaders in the first two decades? And why? What were the main achievements and limitations of this strategy? Why was this development strategy abandoned in later years? Stamps like these, issued mostly between 1955 and 1968, depicted a vision of Left to right, top to Refinery, Tractor, Sindri Fertilisers, Bhakra Dam, Electric Train, Wheat Dam, Hindustan Aircraft As the global demand for steel increases, Orissa, which has one of the largest reserves of untapped iron ore in the country, is being seen as an important investment destination. The State government hopes to cash in on this unprecedented demand for iron ore and has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with both international and domestic steel makers. The government believes that this would bring in necessary capital investment and proivde a lot of employment opportunities. The iron ore resources lie in some of the most underdeveloped and predominantly tribal districts of the state. The tribal population fears that the setting up of industries would mean displacement from their home and livelihood. The environmentalists fear that mining and industry would pollute the environment. The central government feels that if the industry is not allowed it would set a bad example and discourage investments in the country. Can you identify the various interests involved in this case? What are their key points of conflict? Do you think there are any common points on which everyone can agree? Can this issue be resolved in a way which satisfies all the various interests? As you ask these questions, you would find yourself facing yet bigger questions. What kind of development does Orissa need? Indeed, whose need can be called Orissa s need? These questions cannot be answered by an expert. Decisions of this kind involve weighing the interests of one social group against another, present generation against future generations. In a democracy such major decisions should be taken or at least approved by the people themselves.  It is important to take advice from experts on mining, from environmentalists and from economists. Yet the final decision must be a political decision, taken by people s representatives who are in touch with the feelings of the people. After Independence our country had to make a series of major decisions like this. Each of these decisions could not be made independent of other such decisions. All these decisions were bound together by a shared vision or model of economic development. Almost everyone agreed Orissa villagers protest against POSCO plant BHUBANESWAR: People facing Korean company s office here on Thursday. They were demanding cancellation of the memorandum of understanding signed between the company and the Orissa government one year ago. More than 100 men and women from the gram panchayats of Dhinkia, Nuagaon and Gadakujanga tried to enter the office premises but the police prevented them. Raising slogans, the protesters said the company should not be allowed to set up its plant at the cost of their lives and livelihood. The demonstration was organised by the Rashtriya Yuva Sangathan and the The Hindu, 23 June 2006 pOLITICS OF PLANNED 46                                                                   Politics in India since Independence that the development of India should mean both economic growth and social and economic justice. It was also agreed that this matter cannot be left to businessmen, industrialists and farmers themselves, that the government should play a key role in this. There was disagreement, however, on the kind of role that the government must play in ensuring growth with justice. Was it necessary to have a centralised institution to plan for the entire country? Should the government itself run some key industries and business? How much importance was to be attached to the needs of justice if it differed from the requirements of economic growth? Each of these questions involved contestation which has continued ever since. Each of the decision had political consequence. Most of these issues involved political judgement and required consultations among political parties and approval of the public. That is why we need to study the process of development as a part of the history of politics in India. Ideas of development Very often this contestation involves the very idea of development. The example of Orissa shows us that it is not enough to say that everyone wants development. For  development  has different meanings for different sections of the people. Development would mean different things for example, to an industrialist who is planning to set up a steel plant, to an urban consumer of steel and to the Adivasi who lives in that region.  Thus any discussion on development is bound to generate contradictions, conflicts and debates. The first decade after independence witnessed a lot of debate around this question. It was common then, as it is even now, for people to refer to the  West   as the standard for measuring development.  Development  was about becoming more  modern  and modern was about becoming more like the industrialised countries of the West. This is how common people as well as the experts thought.  It was believed that every country would go through the process of modernisation as in the West, which involved the breakdown of traditional social structures and the rise of capitalism and liberalism. Modernisation was also associated with the ideas of growth, material progress and scientific rationality.  This kind of idea of development allowed What is Left and what is Right? In the politics of most countries, you will always come across references to parties and groups with a left or right  ideology or leaning. These terms characterise the position of the concerned groups or parties regarding social change and role of the state in effecting economic redistribution. Left often refers to those who are in favour of state control of the economy and prefers state regulation over free competition. The Right refers to those who believe that free competition and market economy alone ensure progress and that the government should not unnecessarily intervene in Can you tell which of the parties in the 1960s were Rightist and which were the Left parties? Where would you place the Congress party of that time? Politics of Planned Development                                                                           47 everyone to talk about different countries as developed, developing or On the eve of Independence, India had before it, two models of modern development: the liberal-capitalist model as in much of Europe and the US and the socialist model as in the USSR. You have already studied these two ideologies and read about the  cold war  between the two super powers. There were many in India then who were deeply impressed by the Soviet model of development. These included not just the leaders of the Communist Party of India, but also those of the Socialist Party and leaders like Nehru within the Congress. There were very few supporters of the American style This reflected a broad consensus that had developed during the national movement.  The nationalist leaders were clear that the economic concerns of the government of free India would  have to be different from the narrowly defined commercial functions of the colonial government. It was clear, moreover, that the task of poverty alleviation and social and economic redistribution was being seen primarily as the responsibility of the government.    There were debates among them. For some, industrialisation seemed to be the preferred path.  For others, the development of agriculture and in particular alleviation of rural poverty was the priority. Despite the various differences, there was a consensus on one point: that development could not be left to private actors, that there was the need for the government to develop a design or plan for development. Are you saying we don t have to be western in order to be modern? Is that Credit: Hindustan Times the staff of 48                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Do you recall any reference to the Planning Commission in your book Constitution at Work last year? Actually there was none, for the Planning Commission is not one of the many commissions and other bodies set up by the Constitution. The Planning Commission was set up in March, 1950 by a simple resolution of the Government of India. It has an advisory role and its recommendations become effective only when the Union Cabinet approved these. The resolution which set up the Commission defined the scope of its work in the following terms:  The Constitution of India has guaranteed certain Fundamental Rights to the citizens of India and enunciated certain Directive Principles of State Policy, in particular, that the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting.a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall... direct its policy towards securing, among other (a)	 that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood; (b)	 that the ownership and control of the material resources of the are so distributed as best to subserve the common good; (c)	 that the operation of the economic system does not result in concentration of wealth and means of production to the common I wonder if the Planning actually followed these objectives in practice. The Government of India Commission with a new Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India). This came into existence on 1 January 2015. Find out about its objectives and composition from the Politics of Planned Development                                                                           49 In fact the idea of planning as a process of rebuilding economy earned a good deal of public support in the 1940s and 1950s all over the world. The experience of Great Depression in Europe, the inter-war reconstruction of Japan and Germany, and most of all the spectacular economic growth against heavy odds in the Soviet Union in the 1930s and 1940s contributed to this consensus. Thus the Planning Commission was not a sudden invention. In fact, it has a very interesting history. We commonly assume that private investors, such as industrialists and big business entrepreneurs, are averse to ideas of planning: they seek an open economy without any state control in the flow of capital. That was not what happened here. Rather, a section of the big industrialists got together in 1944 and drafted a joint proposal for setting up a planned economy in the country. It was called the Bombay Plan. The Bombay Plan wanted the state to take major initiatives in industrial and other economic investments. Thus, from left to right, planning for development was the most obvious choice for the country after Independence. Soon after India became independent, the Planning Commission came into being. The Prime Minister was its Chairperson. It became the most influential and central machinery for deciding what path and strategy India would adopt for its development. The Early  Initiatives As in the USSR, the Planning Commission of India opted for five year plans (FYP). The idea is very simple: the Government of India prepares a document that has a plan for all its income and expenditure for the next five years.  Accordingly the budget of the central and all the State governments is divided into two parts:  non-plan  budget that is spent on routine items on a yearly basis and  plan  budget that is spent on 50                                                                   Politics in India since Independence a five year basis as per the priorities fixed by the plan.  A five year plan has the advantage of permitting the government to focus on the larger picture and make long-term intervention in the economy. The draft of the First Five Year Plan and then the actual Plan Document, released in December 1951, generated a lot of excitement in the country. People from all walks of life   academics, journalists, government and private sector employees, industrialists, farmers, politicians etc.   discussed and debated the documents extensively. The excitement with planning reached its peak with the launching of the Second Five Year Plan in 1956 and continued somewhat till the Third Five Year Plan in 1961. The Fourth Plan was due to start in 1966. By this time, the novelty of planning had declined considerably, and moreover, India was facing acute economic crisis. The government decided to take a  plan holiday. Though many criticisms emerged both about the process and the priorities of these plans, the foundation of India s economic development was firmly in place by then. Credit: Sudhir Dar/UNDP and Planning Commission First Five Year Plan Politics of Planned Development                                                                           51 The First Five Year Plan The First Five Year Plan (1951 1956) sought to get the country s economy out of the cycle of poverty. K.N. Raj, a young economist involved in drafting the plan, argued that India should  hasten slowly  for the first two decades as a fast rate of development might endanger democracy. The First Five Year Plan addressed, mainly, the agrarian sector including investment in dams and irrigation. Agricultural sector was hit hardest by Partition and needed urgent attention. Huge allocations were made for large- scale projects like the Bhakhra Nangal Dam. The Plan identified the pattern of land distribution in the country as the principal obstacle in the way of agricultural growth. It focused on land reforms as the key to the country s development. One of the basic aims of the planners was to raise the level of national income, which could be possible only if the people saved more money than they spent. As the basic level of spending was very low in the 1950s, it could not be reduced any more. So the planners sought to push savings up. That too was difficult as the total capital stock in the country was rather low compared to the total number of employable people. Nevertheless, people s savings did rise in the first phase of the planned process until the end of the Third Five Year Plan. But, the rise was not as spectacular as was expected at the beginning of the First Plan. Later, from the early 1960s till the early 1970s, the proportion of savings in the country actually dropped consistently. The Second FYP stressed on heavy industries. It was drafted by a team of economists and planners under the leadership of P. C. Mahalanobis. If the first plan had preached patience, the second wanted to bring about quick structural transformation by making changes simultaneously in all possible directions. Before this plan was finalised, the Congress party at its session held at Avadi near the then Madras city, passed an important resolution. It declared that  socialist pattern of society  was its goal. This was reflected in the Second Plan. The government imposed substantial tariffs on imports in order to protect domestic industries. Such protected environment helped both public and private sector industries to grow. As savings and investment were growing in this period, a bulk of these industries like electricity, railways, steel, machineries and communication could be developed in the public sector. Indeed, such a push for industrialisation marked a turning point in founder of Indian (1931);  architect of the Second Plan; supporter of rapid active role of the Tenth Five Year Plan 52                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Which of these statements about the Bombay Plan is incorrect? It was a blueprint for India s economic future. It supported state-ownership of industry. It was made by some leading industrialists. It supported strongly the idea of planning.n Which of the following ideas did not form part of the early phase of India s development policy? The idea of planning in India was drawn from (a)  the Bombay plan (c)  Gandhian vision of (b) 	experiences of the Soviet (d) 	Demand by peasant b and d only iii.	 a and b only ii.	 d and c only iv.	 all the above Match the following. P C Mahalanobis What were the major differences in the approach towards development at the time of Independence? Has the debate been resolved? What was the major thrust of the First Five Year Plan? In which ways did the Second Plan differ from the first one? Read the following passage and answer the questions below:  In the early years of Independence, two contradictory tendencies were already well advanced inside the Congress party. On the one 52                                                                   Politics in India since Independence It, however, had its problems as well. India was technologically backward, so it had to spend precious foreign exchange to buy technology from the global market. That apart, as industry attracted more investment than agriculture, the possibility of food shortage loomed large. The Indian planners found balancing industry and agriculture really difficult. The Third Plan was not significantly different from the Second. Critics pointed out that the plan strategies from this time around displayed an unmistakable  urban bias. Others thought that industry was wrongly given priority over agriculture. There were also those who wanted focus on agriculture-related industries rather than heavy ones. Politics of Planned Development                                                                           53 hand, the national party executive endorsed socialist principles of state ownership, regulation and control over key sectors of the economy in order to improve productivity and at the same time curb economic concentration. On the other hand, the national Congress government pursued liberal economic policies and incentives to private investment that was justified in terms of the sole criterion of achieving maximum increase in production.      Francine Frankel What is the contradiction that the author is talking about? What would be the political implications of a contradiction like If the author is correct, why is it that the Congress was pursuing this policy? Was it related to the nature of the Was there also a contradiction between the central leadership of the Congress party and its Sate level leaders? Politics of Planned Development                                                                           53 In this chapter  Thus far we have focussed in this book on the developments within the country and on domestic challenges. We now turn to the external challenges. Here too our leaders faced the challenge with an innovative response by way of the policy of non-alignment. But they also found themselves in conflict with neighbours. This led to three wars in 1962, 1965 and 1971. These wars, and the external relations in general, were shaped by and had their impact on the politics in the country. In this chapter we study the story of this relationship between the external and the internal politics by focussing on the international context that shaped India s external relations; the operational principles that informed the country s foreign the history of India s relations with China and Pakistan; and the evolution of India s nuclear policy. Nehru with Nkrumah from Ghana, Nasser from Egypt, Sukarno from Indonesia and Tito from Yugoslavia at a meeting of non- aligned nations, New York, October 1960. These five comprised the core leadership of the India was born as an independent nation-state in a very trying and challenging international context. The world had witnessed a devastating war and was grappling with issues of reconstruction; yet another attempt to establish an international body was underway; many new countries were emerging as a result of the collapse of colonialism; and most new nations were trying to come to terms with the twin challenges of welfare and democracy. Free India s foreign policy reflected all these concerns in the period immediately after independence. Apart from these factors at the global level, India had its own share of concerns. The British government left behind the legacy of many international disputes; partition created its own pressures, and the task of poverty alleviation was already waiting for fulfilment. This was the overall context in which India started participating in the world affairs as an independent nation-state. As a nation born in the backdrop of the world war, India decided to conduct its foreign relations with an aim to respect the sovereignty of all other nations and to achieve security through the maintenance of peace. This aim finds an echo in the Directive Principles of State Just as both internal and external factors guide the behaviour of an individual or a family, both domestic and international environment influence the foreign policy of a nation. The developing countries lack the required resources to effectively advocate their concerns in the international system. So they pursue more modest goals than the advanced states. They focus more on peace and development in their own neighbourhood. Moreover, their economic and security dependence on the more powerful states occasionally influences their foreign policy. In the period immediately after the second world war, many developing nations chose to support the foreign policy preferences of the powerful countries who were giving them aid or credits.  This resulted in the division of countries of the world into two clear camps. One was under the influence of the United States and its western allies and the other was under the influence of the then Soviet Union. There was also the experiment called Non- Aligned Movement in which India had played an important role. However, the end of the Cold War changed the context of international relations entirely. But when India achieved its freedom and started framing independence consist of? It consists fundamentally and basically of foreign relations. That is the test of independence. All else is local autonomy. Once foreign relations go out of your hands into the charge of somebody else, to that extent and in that measure you are during a debate in the Constituent Assembly in 56                                                                   Politics in India since Independence its foreign policy, the Cold War was just beginning and the world was getting divided into these two camps. Did India belong to any of these two camps in global politics of the fifties and the sixties? Was it successful in conducting its foreign policy peacefully and avoiding The Policy of non-alignment The Indian national movement was not an isolated process. It was a part of the worldwide struggle against colonialism and imperialism. It influenced the liberation movements of many Asian and African countries. Prior to India s independence, there were contacts between the nationalist leaders of India and those of other colonies, united as they were in their common struggle against colonialism and imperialism. The creation of the Indian National Army (INA) by Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose during the Second World War was the clearest manifestation of the linkages established between India and overseas Indians during the freedom struggle. The foreign policy of a nation reflects the interplay of domestic and external factors. Therefore, the noble ideals that inspired India s struggle for freedom influenced the making of its foreign policy. But India s attainment of independence coincided with the beginning of the Cold War era, a period which was marked by the political, economic, and military confrontation at the global level between the two blocs led by the superpowers, the US and the USSR. The same period also witnessed developments like the establishment of the UN, the creation of nuclear weapons, the emergence of Communist The Constitutional principles Article 51 of the Indian Constitution lays down some Directive Principles of State Policy on  Promotion of international peace and security.  The State shall endeavour to   (a)  Promote international peace and security (b) 	Maintain just and honourable relations between nations (c) 	Foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised people with one another; and (d) 	Encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.  How well did the Indian state live up to these principles in the first two decades after Independence? You may come back to this question after reading the chapter. It s the fourth chapter and it s Nehru once again! Was he a superman or what? Or has his role been India s external relations                                                                                     57 China, and the beginning of decolonisation. So India s leadership had to pursue its national interests within the prevailing international The first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru played a crucial role in setting the national agenda. He was his own foreign minister. Thus both as the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, he exercised profound influence in the formulation and implementation of India s foreign policy from 1946 to 1964. The three major objectives of Nehru s foreign policy were to preserve the hard-earned sovereignty, protect territorial integrity, and promote rapid economic development. Nehru wished to achieve these objectives through the strategy of non- alignment. There were, of course, parties and groups in the country that believed that India should be more friendly with the bloc led by the US because that bloc claimed to be pro-democracy. Among those who thought on these lines were leaders like Dr Ambedkar. Some political parties, which were opposed to communism, also wanted India to follow a pro-US foreign policy. These included the Bharatiya Jan Sangh and later the Swatantra Party.  But Nehru possessed considerable leeway in formulating foreign policy. Distance from two camps The foreign policy of independent India vigorously pursued the dream of a peaceful world by advocating the policy of non-alignment, by reducing Cold War tensions and by contributing human resources to the UN peacekeeping operations. You might ask why India did not join either of the two camps during the Cold War era. India wanted to keep away from the military alliances led by US and Soviet Union against each other. During the Cold War, the US-led North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact came into existence. India advocated non-alignment as the ideal foreign policy approach. This was a difficult balancing act and sometimes the balance did not appear perfect. In 1956 when Britain attacked Egypt over the Suez Canal issue, India led the world protest against this neo-colonial invasion. But in the same year when the USSR invaded Hungary, India did not join its public condemnation. Despite such a situation, by and large India did take an independent stand on various international issues and could get aid and assistance from members of both the blocs. While India was trying to convince the other developing countries about the policy of non-alignment, Pakistan joined the US-led military alliances. The US was not happy about India s independent initiatives and the policy of non-alignment. Therefore, there was a considerable policy is to avoid entanglement in power politics and not to join any group of powers as against any other group. The two leading groups today are the Russian bloc and the Anglo- American bloc. We must be friendly to both and yet not join either. Both America and Russia suspicious of each other as well as of other countries. This makes our path difficult and we may well be suspected by each of leaning towards the other. This cannot be Letter to K.P. S. 58                                                                   Politics in India since Independence unease in Indo-US relations during the 1950s. The US also resented India s growing partnership with the Soviet Union. You have studied in the last chapter, the strategy of planned economic development adopted by India. This policy emphasised import-substitution. The emphasis on developing a resource base also meant that export oriented growth was limited.  This development strategy limited India s economic interaction with the outside world. Yet, given its size, location and power potential, Nehru envisaged a major role for India in world affairs and especially in Asian affairs. His era was marked by the establishment of contacts between India and other newly independent states in Asia and Africa. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, Nehru had been an ardent advocate of Asian unity. Under his leadership, India convened the Asian Relations Conference in March 1947, five months ahead of attaining its independence. India made earnest efforts for the early realisation of freedom of Indonesia from the Dutch colonial regime by convening an international conference in 1949 to support its freedom struggle. India was a staunch supporter of the decolonisation process and firmly opposed racism, especially apartheid in South Africa. The Afro- Asian conference held in the Indonesian city of Bandung in 1955, commonly known as the Bandung Conference, marked the zenith of India s engagement with the newly independent Asian and African nations. The Bandung Conference later led to the establishment of the NAM. The First Summit of the NAM was held in Belgrade in September 1961. Nehru was a co-founder of the NAM. Peace and conflict with China Unlike its relationship with Pakistan, free India began its relationship with China on a very friendly note. After the Chinese revolution in 1949, India was one of the first countries to recognise the communist government. Nehru felt strongly for this neighbour that was coming out of the shadow of western domination and helped the new government in international fora. Some of his colleagues, like Vallabhbhai Patel, were worried about a possible Chinese aggression in future. But Nehru thought it was  exceedingly unlikely  that India will face an attack from China. For a very long time, the Chinese border was guarded by para-military forces, not the army. The joint enunciation of Panchsheel, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, by the Indian Prime Minister Nehru and the Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai on 29 April 1954 was a step in the direction of stronger relationship between the two countries. Indian and Chinese leaders visited each other s country and were greeted by large and Did we have more recognition and power in the world when we were younger, poorer and more vulnerable than now? Isn t that a country without material, men or money   the three means of power   is now fast coming to be recognised as the biggest moral power in the civilised world  her word listened to with respect in the councils of the great. Letter to Edwina India s external relations                                                                                     59 The plateau of the central Asian region called Tibet is one of the major issues that historically caused tension between India and China. From time to time in history, China had claimed administrative control over Tibet. And from time to time, Tibet was independent too. In 1950, China took over control of Tibet. Large sections of the Tibetan population opposed this takeover. India tried to persuade China to recognise Tibet s claims for independence. When the Panchsheel agreement was signed between India and China in 1954, through one of its clauses about respecting each other s territorial integrity and sovereignty, India conceded China s claim over Tibet. The Tibetan spiritual leader Dalai Lama accompanied the Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai during the official Chinese visit to India in 1956. He informed Nehru about the worsening situation in Tibet. But China had already assured India that Tibet will be given greater autonomy than enjoyed by any other region of China. In 1958, there was armed uprising in Tibet against China s occupation. This was suppressed by the Chinese forces. Sensing that the situation had become worse, in 1959, the Dalai Lama crossed over into the Indian border and sought asylum which was granted. The Chinese government strongly protested against this.   Over the last half century, a large number of Tibetans have also sought refuge in India and many other countries of the world. In India, particularly in Delhi, there are large settlements of Tibetan refugees. Dharmashala in Himachal Pradesh is perhaps the largest refuge settlement of Tibetans in India. The Dalai Lama has also made Dharmashala his home in India. In the 1950s and 1960s many political leaders and parties in India including the Socialist Party and the Jan Sangh supported the cause of Tibet s independence. China has created the Tibet autonomous region, which is an integral part of China. Tibetans oppose the Chinese claim that Tibet is part of Chinese territory. They also oppose the policy of bringing into Tibet more and more Chinese settlers. Tibetans dispute China s claim that autonomy is granted to the region. They think that China wants to undermine the traditional religion and culture of Tibet. Credit: Homai Vyarawalla Dalai Lama enters India with his followers. India s external relations                                                                                     59 60                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Border disputes with China erupted in 1960. Talks between Nehru and Mao Tsetung is not a map to be an India s external relations                                                                                     61 in the Labour Party in UK 1947; Indian High Commissioner in UK and later head of India s delegation to UN; Rajya Sabha MP and later Lok Sabha MP; member of the Union Cabinet from 1956; Defence Minsiter since 1957; considered very close to Nehru; resigned after the India-China war in Credit: R. K. Laxman 62                                                                   Politics in India since Independence it from my Ji cried in public when Lata Mangeshkar sang  Ai mere watan ke logo  after the 1962 war. The Chinese invasion, 1962 Two developments strained this relationship. China annexed Tibet in 1950 and thus removed a historical buffer between the two countries. Initially, the government of India did not oppose this openly. But as more information came in about the suppression of Tibetan culture, the Indian government grew uneasy. The Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, sought and obtained political asylum in India in 1959. China alleged that the government of India was allowing anti-China activities to take place from within India. A little earlier, a boundary dispute had surfaced between India and China. India claimed that the boundary was a matter settled in colonial time, but China said that any colonial decision did not apply. The main dispute was about the western and the eastern end of the long border. China claimed two areas within the Indian territory: Aksai-chin area in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir and much of the state of Arunachal Pradesh in what was then called NEFA (North Eastern Frontier Agency). Between 1957 and 1959, the Chinese occupied the Aksai-chin area and built a strategic road there. Despite a very long correspondence and discussion among top leaders, these differences could not be resolved. Several small border skirmishes between the armies of the two countries took place. Around this time, while the entire world s attention was on the Cuban Missile crisis involving the two superpowers, China launched a swift and massive invasion in October 1962 on both the disputed regions. The first attack lasted one week and Chinese forces captured some key areas in Arunachal Pradesh. The second wave of attack came next month. While the Indian forces could block the Chinese advances on the western front in Ladakh, in the east the Chinese managed to advance nearly to the entry point of Assam plains. Finally, China declared a unilateral ceasefire and its troops withdrew to where they were before the invasion began. The China war dented India s image at home and abroad. India had to approach the Americans and the British for military assistance to tide over the crisis. The Soviet Union remained neutral during the conflict. It induced a sense of national humiliation and at the same time strengthened a spirit of nationalism. Some of the top army commanders either resigned or were retired. Nehru s close associate and the then Defence Minister, V. Krishna Menon, had to leave the cabinet. Nehru s own stature suffered as he was severely criticised for his na ve assessment of the Chinese intentions and the lack of military preparedness. For the first time, a no-confidence motion against his government was moved and debated in the Lok Sabha. Soon thereafter, the Congress lost some key by-elections to Lok Sabha. The political mood of the country had begun to change. impression (of Zhou Enlai) was very favourable..the Chinese premier is, I believe a good type of man and In a letter, December 1956 India s external relations                                                                                     63 It took more than a decade for India and China to resume normal relations. It was in 1976 that full diplomatic relations were restored between the two countries. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the first top level leader (he was then External Affairs Minister) to visit China in 1979. Later, Rajiv Gandhi became the first Prime Minister after Nehru to visit China. Since then, the emphasis is more on trade relations between the two countries. In the book, Contemporary World Politics, you have already read about these Sino-Indian relations since 1962 Let s watch a Film A small platoon of Indian army is rescued by the gypsies in Ladakh region. The enemy has surrounded their post. Capt. Bahadur Singh and his gypsy jawans vacate their posts. Both Bahadur Singh and Kammo die while resisting the Chinese but the jawans too, are overpowered by the enemy and lay down their lives for the country. Set in the backdrop of the China war of 1962, this film portrays the soldier and his travails as its central theme. It pays tribute to the soldiers while depicting their plight, and the political frustration over the betrayal by the Chinese. The film uses documentary footage of war scenes and is considered as one of the early war films made in Hindi. Director: Chetan Anand Actors: Dharmendra, Priya Rajvansh, Balraj Sahni, Jayant, Sudhir, Sanjay Khan, Vijay The Sino-Indian conflict affected the opposition as well. This and the growing rift between China and the Soviet Union created irreconcilable differences within the Communist Party of India (CPI). The pro-USSR faction remained within the CPI and moved towards closer ties with the Congress. The other faction was for sometime closer to China and was against any ties with the Congress. The party split in 1964 and the leaders of the latter faction formed the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI-M). In the wake of the China war, many leaders of what became CPI (M) were arrested for being The war with China alerted the Indian leadership to the volatile situation in the Northeast region. Apart from being isolated and extremely underdeveloped, this region also presented India with the challenge of national integration and political unity. The process of its reorganisation began soon after the China war. Nagaland was granted statehood; Manipur and Tripura, though Union Territories, were given the right to elect their own legislative assemblies. 64                                                                   Politics in India since Independence we say India and Pakistan had a war? Leaders quarrel and armies fight wars. Most ordinary citizens have nothing to do Wars and Peace with Pakistan In the case of Pakistan, the conflict started just after partition over the dispute on Jammu and Kashmir. You will read more about the dispute in Chapter 7. A proxy war broke out between the Indian and Pakistani armies in Jammu and Kashmir during 1947 itself. But this did not turn into a full war. The issue was then referred to the UN. Pakistan soon emerged as a critical factor in India s relations with the US and subsequently with China. The Kashmir conflict did not prevent cooperation between the governments of India and Pakistan. Both the governments worked together to restore the women abducted during partition to their original families. A long-term dispute about the sharing of river waters was resolved through mediation by the World Bank. The India- Pakistan Indus Waters Treaty was signed by Nehru and General Ayub Khan in 1960. Despite all ups and downs in the Indo-Pak relations, this treaty has worked well. A more serious armed conflict between the two countries began in 1965. As you would read in the next chapter, by then Lal Bahadur Shastri had taken over as the Prime Minister. In April 1965 Pakistan launched armed attacks in the Rann of Kutch area of Gujarat. This was followed by a bigger offensive in Jammu and Kashmir in August- September. Pakistani rulers were hoping to get support from the local population there, but it did not happen. In order to ease the pressure on the Kashmir front, Shastri ordered Indian troops to launch a counter-offensive on the Punjab border. In a fierce battle, the Indian army reached close to Lahore. The hostilities came to an end with the UN intervention. Later, Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and Pakistan s General Ayub Khan signed the Tashkent Agreement, brokered by the Soviet Union, in January 1966. Though India could inflict considerable military loss on Pakistan, the 1965 war added to India s already difficult economic situation. Bangladesh war, 1971 Beginning in 1970, Pakistan faced its biggest internal crisis. The country s first general election produced a split verdict   Zulfikar Ali Bhutto s party emerged a winner in West Pakistan, while the Awami League led by Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman swept through East Pakistan. The Bengali population of East Pakistan had voted to protest against years of being treated as second class citizens by the rulers based in West Pakistan. The Pakistani rulers were not willing to accept the democratic verdict. Nor were they ready to accept the Awami League s demand for a federation. Instead, in early 1971, the Pakistani army arrested Sheikh Mujib and unleashed a reign of terror on the people of East Pakistan. In India s external relations                                                                                     65 66                                                                   Politics in India since Independence joining the Soviet bloc. Can we say that we were non-aligned even after signing this treaty with the Soviet response to this, the people started a struggle to liberate  Bangladesh  from Pakistan. Throughout 1971, India had to bear the burden of about 80 lakh refugees who fled East Pakistan and took shelter in the neighbouring areas in India. India extended moral and material support to the freedom struggle in Bangladesh. Pakistan accused India of a conspiracy to break it up. Support for Pakistan came from the US and China. The US-China rapprochement that began in the late 1960s resulted in a realignment of forces in Asia. Henry Kissinger, the adviser to the US President Richard Nixon, made a secret visit to China via Pakistan in July 1971. In order to counter the US-Pakistan-China axis, India signed a 20-year Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Soviet Union in August 1971. This treaty assured India of Soviet support if the country faced any attack. After months of diplomatic tension and military build-up, a full-scale war between India and Pakistan broke out in December 1971. Pakistani aircrafts attacked Punjab and Rajasthan, while the army moved on the Jammu and Kashmir front. India retaliated with an attack involving the air force, navy and the army on both the Western and the Eastern front. Welcomed and supported by the local population, the Indian army made rapid progress in East Pakistan. Within ten days the Indian army had surrounded Dhaka from three sides and the Pakistani army of about 90,000 had to surrender. With Bangladesh as a free country, India declared a unilateral ceasefire. Later, the signing of the Shimla Agreement between Indira Gandhi and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto on 3 July 1972 formalised the return of peace. A decisive victory in the war led to national jubiliation. Most people in India saw this as a moment of glory and a clear sign of India s growing military prowess. As you would read in the next chapter, Indira Gandhi was the Prime Minister at this time. She had already won the Lok Sahba elections in 1971. Her personal popularity soared Fast Forward   Kargil Confrontation In the early part of 1999 several points on the Indian side of the LoC in the Mashkoh, Dras, Kaksar and Batalik areas were occupied by forces claiming to be Mujahideens. Suspecting involvement of the Pakistan Army, Indian forces started reacting to this occupation. This led to a confrontation between the two countries.  This is known as the Kargil conflict. This conflict went on during May and June 1999.  By 26 July 1999, India had recovered control of many of the lost points. The Kargil conflict drew attention worldwide for the reason that only one year prior to that, both India and Pakistan had attained nuclear capability. However, this conflict remained confined only to the Kargil region. In Pakistan, this conflict has been the source of a major controversy as it was alleged later that the Prime Minister of Pakistan was kept in the dark by the Army Chief. Soon after the conflict, the government of Pakistan was taken over by the Pakistan Army led by the Army Chief, General India s external relations                                                                                     67 68                                                                   Politics in India since Independence it all about atom bombs? Why don t we say so? further after the 1971 war. After the war, assembly elections in most States took place, bringing large majorities for the Congress party in India, with its limited resources, had initiated development planning. However, conflicts with neighbours derailed the five-year after 1962, as India had to embark on a military modernisation drive. The Department of Defence Production was established in November 1962 and the Department of Defence Supplies in November 1965. The Third Plan (1961-66) was affected and it was followed by three Annual Plans and the Fourth Plan could be initiated only in 1969. India s defence expenditure increased enormously after the wars. India s nuclear policy Another crucial development of this period was the first nuclear explosion undertaken by India in May 1974. Nehru had always put his faith in science and technology for rapidly building a modern India. A significant component of his industrialisation plans was the nuclear programme initiated in the late 1940s under the guidance of Homi J. Bhabha. India wanted to generate atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Nehru was against nuclear weapons. So he pleaded with the superpowers for comprehensive nuclear disarmament. However, the nuclear arsenal kept rising. When Communist China conducted nuclear tests in October 1964, the five nuclear weapon powers, the US, USSR, UK, France, and China (Taiwan then represented China)    also the five Permanent Members of the UN Security Council   tried to impose the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 on the rest of the world. India always considered the NPT as discriminatory and had refused to sign it. When India conducted its first nuclear test, it was termed as peaceful explosion. India argued that it was committed to the policy of using nuclear power only for peaceful purposes. The period when the nuclear test was conducted was a difficult period in domestic politics. Following the Arab-Israel War of 1973, the entire world was affected by the Oil Shock due to the massive hike in the oil prices by the Arab nations. It led to economic turmoil in India resulting in high inflation. As you will read in Chapter Six, many agitations were going on in the country around this time, including a nationwide railway strike. Although there are minor differences among political parties about how to conduct external relations, Indian politics is generally marked by a broad agreement among the parties on national integration, protection of international boundaries, and on questions of national interest. Therefore, we find that in the course of the decade of 1962-1971, when India faced three wars, or even later, when different parties came to power from time to time, foreign policy has played only a limited role in party politics. India s external relations                                                                                     69 Shifting alliances in world politics As you will read in Chapter Six and also in Chapter Eight, many non-Congress governments came to power in the period starting 1977. This was also the time when world politics was changing dramatically. What did it mean for India s external relations? The Janata Party government that came to power in 1977 announced that it would follow genuine non-alignment. This implied that the pro-Soviet tilt in the foreign policy will be corrected. Since then, all governments (Congress or non-Congress) have taken initiatives for restoring better relations with China and entering into close ties with US. In Indian politics and in popular mind, India s foreign policy is always very closely linked to two questions. One is India s stand vis- -vis Pakistan and the other is Indo-US relations. In the post-1990 period the ruling parties have often been criticised for their pro-US Foreign policy is always dictated by ideas of national interest. In the period after 1990, Russia, though it continues to be an important friend of India, has lost its global pre- eminence. Therefore, India s foreign policy has shifted to a more pro-US strategy. Besides, the contemporary international situation is more influenced by economic interests than by military interests. This has also made an impact on India s foreign policy choices. At the same time, Indo-Pakistan relations have witnessed many new developments during this period. While Kashmir continues to be the main issue between the two countries, there have been many efforts to restore normal relations. This means that cultural exchanges, movement of citizens and economic cooperation would be encouraged by both countries. Do you know that a train and a bus service operate between these two countries?  This has been a major achievement of the recent times.  But that could not avoid the near-war situation from emerging in 1999. Even after this setback to the peace process, efforts at negotiating durable peace have been going on. Fast Forward   India s Nuclear Programme India has opposed the international treaties aimed at non-proliferation since they were selectively applicable to the non-nuclear powers and legitimised the monopoly of the five nuclear weapons powers. Thus, India opposed the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 and also refused to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). India conducted a series of nuclear tests in May 1998, demonstrating its capacity to use nuclear energy for military purposes. Pakistan soon followed, thereby increasing the vulnerability of the region to a nuclear exchange. The international community was extremely critical of the nuclear tests in the subcontinent and sanctions were imposed on both India and Pakistan, which were subsequently waived. India s nuclear doctrine of credible minimum nuclear deterrence professes  no first use  and reiterates India s commitment to global, verifiable and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament leading to a nuclear weapons free world. 70                                                                   Politics in India since Independence 1.  Write  true  or  false  against each of these statements. (a) Non-alignment allowed India to gain assistance both from USA and (b) India s relationship with her neighbours has been strained from the (c)	 The cold war has affected the relationship between India and (d) The treaty of Peace and Friendship in 1971 was the result of India s closeness to USA. 2.	 Match the following (a) The goal of India s foreign Tibetan spiritual leader who policy in the period 1950-1964 crossed over to India (b)  Panchsheel                                    ii. Preservation of territorial integrity, sovereignty and (c)  Bandung Conference                    iii. Five principles of peaceful (d)  Dalai Lama                                    iv. Led to the establishment of 3.  Why did Nehru regard conduct of foreign relations as an essential indicator of independence? State any two reasons with examples to support your reading. 4.   The conduct of foreign affairs is an outcome of a two-way interaction between domestic compulsions and prevailing international climate. Take one example from India s external relations in the 1960s to substantiate your answer. 5.  Identify any two aspects of India s foreign policy that you would like to retain and two that you would like to change, if you were to become a decision maker. Give reasons to support your position. 6.  	Write short notes on the following. (a) India s Nuclear policy (b) Consensus in foreign policy matters 7.  India s foreign policy was built around the principles of peace and cooperation. But India fought three wars in a space of ten years between 1962 and 1971. Would you say that this was a failure of the foreign policy? Or would you say that this was a result of international situation? Give reasons to support your answer. 70                                                                   Politics in India since Independence India s external relations                                                                                     71 Does India s foreign policy reflect her desire to be an important regional power? Argue your case with the Bangladesh war of 1971 as an How does political leadership of a nation affect its foreign policy? Explain this with the help of examples from India s foreign policy. Read this passage and answer the questions below:  Broadly, non-alignment means not tying yourself off with military blocs.It means trying to view things, as far as possible, not from the military point of view, though that has to come in sometimes, but independently, and trying to maintain friendly relations with all countries.     Jawaharlal Nehru (a) Why does Nehru want to keep off military blocs? (b) Do you think that the Indo-Soviet friendship treaty violated the principle of non-alignment? Give reasons for your answer. (c)	 If there were no military blocs, do you think non-alignment would have been unnecessary? India s external relations                                                                                     71 In this chapter  In Chapter Two we read about the emergence of the Congress system. This system was first challenged during the 1960s. As political competition became more intense, the Congress found it difficult to retain its dominance. It faced challenges from the opposition that was more powerful and less divided than before. The Congress also faced challenges from within, as the party could no longer accommodate all kinds of differences. In this chapter we pick the story from where we left it in Chapter Two, in order to understand how the political transition took place after Nehru; describe how the opposition unity and the Congress split posed a challenge to Congress dominance; explain how a new Congress led by Indira Gandhi overcame these analyse how new policies and ideologies facilitated the restoration of the Congress system. Originally the election symbol of the Congress was a pair of bullocks. This famous cartoon depicts the changes within the Congress leading to a head- on confrontation in the 22nd year after Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India Challenge of Political Succession Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru passed away in May 1964. He had been unwell for more than a year. This had generated a lot of speculation about the usual question of succession: after Nehru, who? But in a newly independent country like India, this situation gave rise to a more serious question: after Nehru, what? The second question arose from the serious doubts that many outsiders had about whether India s democratic experiment will survive after Nehru. It was feared that like so many other newly independent countries, India too would not be able to manage a democratic succession. A failure to do so, it was feared, could lead to a political role for the army. Besides, there were doubts if the new leadership would be able to handle the multiple crises that awaited a solution. The 1960s were labelled as the  dangerous decade  when or Canada have similar problems, no one talks about failure or disintegration. Why are we under this constant Challenges to and Restoration of the 74                                                                   Politics in India since Independence unresolved problems like poverty, inequality, communal and regional divisions etc. could lead to a failure of the democratic project or even the disintegration of the country. From Nehru to Shastri The ease with which the succession after Nehru took place proved all the critics wrong. When Nehru passed away, K. Kamraj, the president of the Congress party consulted party leaders and Congress members of Parliament and found that there was a consensus in favour of Lal Bahadur Shastri. He was unanimously chosen as the leader of the Congress parliamentary party and thus  became the country s next Prime Minister.  Shastri was a non-controversial leader from Uttar Pradesh who had been a Minister in Nehru s cabinet for many years. Nehru had come to depend a lot on him in his last year. He was known for his simplicity and his commitment to  principles. Earlier he had resigned from the position of Railway Minister accepting moral responsibility for a major railway accident. Shastri was the country s Prime Minister from 1964 to 1966. During Shastri s brief Prime Ministership, the country faced two major challenges.  While India was still recovering from the economic implications of the war with China, failed monsoons, drought and serious food crisis presented a grave challenge. As discussed in the previous chapter, the country also faced a war with Pakistan in 1965. Shastri s famous slogan  Jai Jawan Jai Kisan, symbolised the country s resolve to face both these challenges. Shastri s Prime Ministership came to an abrupt end on 10 January 1966, when he suddenly expired in Tashkent, then in USSR and currently the capital of Uzbekistan. He was there to discuss and sign an agreement with Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of Pakistan, to end the war. From Shastri to Indira Gandhi Thus the Congress faced the challenge of political succession for the second time in two years.  This time there was an intense competition between Morarji Desai and Indira Gandhi. Morarji Desai had earlier served as Chief Minister of Bombay state (today s Maharashtra and Gujarat) and also as a Minister at the centre.  Indira Gandhi, the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, had been Congress President in the past and had also been Union Minister for Information in the Shastri cabinet. This time the senior leaders in the party decided to back Indira Gandhi, but the decision was not unanimous.  The contest was resolved through a secret ballot among Congress MPs.  Indira Gandhi defeated Morarji Desai by securing the support of more than two-thirds of the party s MPs.  A peaceful transition of power, despite intense competition for leadership, was seen as a sign of maturity of Minister of India, in spite of all forebodings, had been named with more dispatch, and much more dignity, than was the new Prime Minister of Britain. Editorial in The Guardian, London, 3 June 1964, comparing the political succession after Nehru with the succession drama after Harold Macmillan in Prime Minister of in the freedom in UP cabinet; Minister in Union 1951 to 1956 when he resigned taking the railway accident and later from 1957 to 1964; coined the famous slogan  Jai Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           75 It took some time before the new Prime Minister could settle down. While Indira Gandhi had been politically active for very long, she had served as a minister under Lal Bahadur Shastri only for a short period. The senior Congress leaders may have supported Indira Gandhi in the belief that her administrative and political inexperience would compel her to be dependent on them for support and guidance.  Within a year of becoming Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi had to lead the party in a Lok Sabha election. Around this time, the economic situation in the country had further deteriorated, adding to her problems. Faced with these difficulties, she set out to gain control over the party and to demonstrate her leadership skills. Indira Gandhi (1917-1984): Prime Minister of India from 1966 to 1977 and 1980 to 1984; daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru; participated in the freedom struggle as a young Congress worker; Congress President in 1958; minister in Shastri s cabinet from 1964-66; led the Congress party to victory in 1967, 1971 and 1980 general elections; credited with the slogan  garibi hatao, victory in 1971 war and for policy initiatives like abolition of Privy Purse, nationalisation of banks, nuclear test and environmental protection; assassinated on 31 October 1984. Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 18 January 1966 76                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Fourth General Elections, 1967 The year 1967 is considered a landmark year in India s political and electoral history. In Chapter Two you read about how the Congress party was the dominant political force throughout the country from 1952 onwards. This trend was to undergo significant changes with the 1967 elections. Context of the elections In the years leading up to the fourth general elections, the country witnessed major changes. Two Prime Ministers had died in quick succession, and the new Prime Minister, who was being seen as a political novice, had been in office for less than a year.  You will recall from the discussion in Chapter Three and in the previous section of this chapter that the period was fraught with grave economic crisis resulting from successive failure of monsoons, widespread drought, It must have been difficult for her   one woman in a world dominated by men. Why don t we have more women in positions Credit: Raghu Rai Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           77 decline in agricultural production, serious food shortage, depletion of foreign exchange reserves, drop in industrial production and exports, combined with a sharp rise in military expenditure and diversion of resources from planning and economic development.  One of the first decisions of the Indira Gandhi government was to devaluate the Indian rupee, under what was seen to be pressure from the US. Earlier one US dollar could be purchased for  less than Rs. 5; after devaluation it cost more than Rs. 7. The economic situation triggered off price rise. People started protesting against the increase in prices of essential commodities, food scarcity, overall economic condition in the country. Bandhs and hartals were called frequently across the country. The government saw the protests as a law and order problem and not as expressions of people s problems. This further increased public bitterness and reinforced popular unrest. greater equality. You will read in the next chapter about how a group of communists who separated from the Communist Party of India (Marxist) to form the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) led armed agrarian agitations. This period also witnessed some of the worst Hindu-Muslim riots remained isolated from party politics in the country. Opposition parties were in the forefront of organising public protests and pressurising the Election in a Rajasthan Village This is a story about 1967 the Chomu constituency, the main parties in the fray were Congress and the Swatantra   party. But village Devisar had dynamics and it got mixed up with the competition between the two parties. Sher Singh, traditionally dominated village politics, but gradually his nephew, Bhim Singh was emerging leader and rival. Though both were Rajputs, Bhim Singh cultivated the support of many non-Rajputs in the village by attending to their requirements after becoming the panchayat Pradhan. So, he struck a new equation the alliance of Rajputs and non-Rajputs. He proved to be more adept in building alliances across the village by supporting candidates in other villages for the posts of village Pradhan. In fact, he took an initiative and took a delegation to the State Chief Minister and Congress leader Mohan Lal Sukhadia for pressing the name of one of his friends from a nearby village as Congress candidate in the Assembly election. When Sukhadia convinced him of some other name, Bhim Singh, in turn, convinced many others that they should work for the party candidate. Bhim Singh knew that if the party candidate won from this constituency, that candidate would become a minister and thus, he would have direct contacts with a minister for the first time! Sher Singh had no option but to work for the Swatantra candidate, who was a jagirdar. He kept telling people that the jagirdar would help build the village school and use his resources for the development of the locality. At least in Devisar village, the Assembly election had turned into a factional fight between uncle and nephew. Based on Anand Chakravarti,  A Village in Chomu Assembly Constituency in Rajasthan.  78                                                                   Politics in India since Independence government. Parties opposed to the Congress realised that the division of their votes kept the Congress in power. Thus parties that were entirely different and disparate in their programmes and ideology got together to form anti-Congress fronts in some states and entered into electoral adjustments of sharing seats in others. They felt that the inexperience of Indira Gandhi and the internal factionalism within the Congress provided them an opportunity to topple the Congress.  The socialist gave this strategy the name of  non-Congressism. He also produced a theoretical argument in its defence: Congress rule was undemocratic and opposed to the interests of ordinary poor people; therefore, the coming together was  necessary for reclaiming democracy for the people. It was in this context of heightened popular discontent and the polarisation of political forces that the fourth general elections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies were held in February 1967. The Congress was facing the electorate for the first time without Nehru. The results jolted the Congress at both the national and state levels. Many contemporary political observers described the election results as a  political earthquake.The Congress did manage to get a majority in the Lok Sabha, but with its lowest tally of seats and share of votes since 1952. Half the ministers in Indira Gandhi s cabinet were defeated. The political stalwarts who lost in their constituencies included Kamaraj in Tamil Nadu, S.K. Patil in Maharashtra, Atulya Ghosh in West Bengal and K. B. Sahay in Bihar....in India, as present trends continue  maintenance of an ordered structure of society is going to slip out of reach of an ordered structure of civil government and the army will be only alternative source of authority and order.  the great experiment of developing India within a democratic framework has failed. Democracy  an article published in the London C. Natarajan Annadurai (1909-1969): Chief Minister of Madras (Tamil Nadu) from 1967; a journalist, popular writer and orator; initially associated with the Justice Party in Madras province; later joined Dravid Kazagham (1934); formed DMK as a political party in 1949; a proponent of Dravid culture, he was opposed to imposition of Hindi and led the anti-Hindi agitations; supporter of greater autonomy to States. Socialist leader and fighter and among the founders of the Party; after the split in the parent party, the leader of the Socialist Party and later the Samyukta Socialist Party; Member, Lok Sabha, 1963- 67; founder editor of Mankind and Jan, known for original contribution to a non-European socialist theory; as political leader, best known for sharp attacks on Nehru, strategy of non-Congressism,  advocacy of reservation for backward castes and opposition to English. Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           79 relevant today? Can it be applied against Left Front in today s West Bengal? illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic 80                                                                   Politics in India since Independence The dramatic nature of the political change would be more apparent to you at the State level. The Congress lost majority in as many as seven States.  In two other States defections prevented it from forming a government. These nine States where the Congress lost power were spread across the country   Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Madras and Kerala. In Madras State (now called Tamil Nadu), a regional party   the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK)   came to power by securing a clear majority.  The DMK won power after having led a massive anti-Hindi agitation by students against the centre on the issue of imposition of Hindi as the official language. This was the first time any non-Congress party had secured a majority of its own in any State. In the other eight States, coalition governments consisting of different non-Congress parties were formed. A popular saying was that one could take a train from Delhi to Howrah and not pass through a single Congress ruled State. It was a strange feeling for those who were used to seeing the Congress in power. So, was the domination of the Congress over? The elections of 1967 brought into picture the phenomenon of coalitions.  Since no single party had got majority, various non- Congress parties came together to form joint legislative parties (called Samyukt Vidhayak Dal in Hindi) that supported non-Congress governments. That is why these governments came to be described as SVD governments.  In most of these cases the coalition partners were  ideologically incongruent. The SVD government in Bihar, for instance, included the two socialist parties   SSP and the PSP   along with the CPI on the left and Jana Sangh on the right. In Punjab it was called the  Popular United Front  and comprised the two rival Akali parties at that time   Sant group and the Master group   with both the communist parties   the CPI and the CPI(M), the SSP, the Republican Party and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh. A cartoonist s reading of Charan Singh s attempt to build a United Front of non-communist parties in 1974 so unusual in see them all Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           81 Another important feature of the politics after the 1967 election was the role played by defections in  the making and unmaking of governments in the States. Defection means an elected representative leaves the party on whose symbol he/she was elected and joins another party. After the 1967 general election, the breakaway Congress legislators played an important role in installing non-Congress governments in three States - Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  The constant realignments and shifting political loyalties in this period gave rise to the expression  Aya Ram, Gaya Ram. The story of  Aya Ram, Gaya Ram  The expression  aya ram, gaya ram  became popular in the political vocabulary in India to describe the practice of frequent floor- crossing by legislators.  Literally translated the terms meant, Ram came and Ram went.  The expression originated in an amazing feat of floor crossing achieved by Gaya Lal, an MLA in Haryana, in 1967. He  changed his party thrice in a fortnight, from Congress to United Front, back to Congress and then within nine hours to United Front again!  It is said that when Gaya Lal declared his intention to quit the United Front and join the Congress, the Congress leader, Rao Birendra Singh brought him to Chandigarh press and declared  Gaya Ram was now Aya Ram. Gaya Lal s feat was immortalised in the phrase  Aya Ram, Gaya Ram  which became the subject of numerous jokes and cartoons. Later, the Constitution was amended to prevent defections. Split in the Congress We saw that after the 1967 elections, the Congress retained power at the Centre but with a reduced majority and lost power in many States. More importantly, the results proved that the Congress could be defeated at the elections. But there was no substitute as yet. Most non- Congress coalition governments in the States did not survive for long. They lost majority, and either new combinations were formed or President s rule had to be imposed. Indira vs. the  Syndicate  The real challenge to Indira Gandhi came not from the opposition but from within her own fighter and Congress Minister of Madras (Tamil Nadu); having efforts to spread education in Madras province; introduced mid-day meal scheme for schoolchildren; in 1963 he proposed that all senior Congressmen should resign from office to make way for younger party workers this proposal is famous as the  Kamaraj plan.  82                                                                   Politics in India since Independence The Congress  Syndicate  Syndicate was the informal name given to a group of Congress leaders who were in control of the party s organisation. It was led by K. Kamraj, former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and then the president of the Congress party. It included powerful State leaders like S. K. Patil of Bombay city (later named as Mumbai), S. Nijalingappa of Mysore (later Karnataka), N. Sanjeeva Reddy of Andhra Pradesh and Atulya Ghosh of West Bengal. Both Lal Bahadur Shastri and later Indira Gandhi owed their position to the support received from the Syndicate. This group had a decisive say in Indira Gandhi s first Council of Ministers and also in policy formulation and implementation. After the Congress split the leaders of the syndicate and those owing allegiance to them  stayed with the Congress (O). Since it was Indira Gandhi s Congress (R) that won the test of popularity, all these big and powerful men of Indian politics lost their power and prestige party.  She had to deal with the  syndicate, a group of Congress.  The Syndicate had played a role in  the installation of Indira Gandhi as the Prime Minister by ensuring her election as the leader of the parliamentary party. These leaders expected Indira Gandhi to follow their advise. Gradually, attempted to assert her position within the government and the party. She chose her trusted group of advisers from outside the party. Slowly and carefully, she sidelined the Syndicate. Indira Gandhi thus faced two challenges. Syndicate.  She also needed to work towards regaining the ground that the Congress had lost in the 1967 elections. Indira Gandhi adopted a very bold strategy. She converted a simple power struggle into an ideological struggle. She launched a series of initiatives to give the government policy a Left orientation. She got the Congress Working Committee to adopt a Ten Point Programme in May 1967. This programme included social control of banks, nationalisation of General Insurance, ceiling on urban property and income, Minister of Bihar between December 1970 and June 1971 and again between June 1977 and April 1979; Freedom Fighter and socialist leader; active in labour and peasant follower of Lohia; participated in the movement led by JP; known for his decision to introduce reservations for the backward classes in Bihar during his second Chief Ministership; strong opponent of the use of English Language. of Lok Sabha; Chief Minister of the then State; regarded as the maker of modern of Congress during there is nothing new about State level leaders being the king-makers at the centre. I thought it happened only in Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           83 public distribution of food grains, land reforms and provision of house sites to the rural poor. While the  syndicate  leaders formally approved this Left-wing programme, they had serious reservations about Presidential election, 1969 The factional rivalry between the Syndicate and Indira Gandhi came in the open in 1969. Following President Zakir Hussain s death, the post of President of the India fell vacant that year. Despite Mrs Gandhi s reservations the  syndicate  managed to nominate her long time opponent and then speaker of the Lok Sabha, N. Sanjeeva Reddy, as the official Congress candidate for the ensuing Presidential elections. Indira Gandhi retaliated by encouraging the then Vice-President, V.V. Giri, to file his nomination as an independent candidate. She also announced several big and popular policy measures like the nationalisation of fourteen leading private banks and the abolition of the  privy purse  or the special privileges given to former princes. Morarji Desai was the Deputy Prime Minister and  The Left Hook  was published after the victory of V.V. Giri, (the boxer with the garland) over the nominee of the Syndicate, represented here by Nijalingappa (on his knees). Credit: R. K. Laxman in The TImes of India, 21 August 1969 1969 to 1974; High Commissioner to Ceylon (Sri Lanka); Labour Minister in Union cabinet; Governor of  U.P., Kerala, Mysore (Karnataka); Vice-President (1967-1969) and acting President after the death of President Zakir Hussain; resigned and contested presidential election as independent candidate; received support from Indira Gandhi for his election as 84                                                                   Politics in India since Independence History   is replete with instances of the tragedy that overtakes democracy when a leader who has risen to power on the crest of a popular wave or with the support of a becomes a victim of and is egged on by a coterie of unscrupulous Letter to Indira Gandhi expelling her from the Finance Minister. On both the above issues serious differences emerged between him and the Prime Minister resulting in Desai leaving the government. Congress had seen differences of this kind in the past. But this time both the parties wanted a showdown which took place during the Presidential elections.  The then Congress President S. Nijalingappa issued a  whip  asking all the Congress MPs and MLAs to vote in favour of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official candidate of the party. Supporters of Indira Gandhi requisitioned a special meeting of the AICC (that is why this faction came to be known as  requisitionists ) but this was refused.  After silently supporting V.V. Giri, the Prime Minister openly called for a  conscience vote  which meant that the MPs and MLAs from the Congress should be free to vote the way they want.  The election ultimately resulted in the victory of V.V. Giri, the independent candidate, and the defeat of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official The defeat of the official Congress candidate formalised the split in the party. The Congress President expelled the Prime Minister from the party; she claimed that her group was the real Congress. By November 1969, the Congress group led by the  syndicate  came to be referred to as the Congress (Organisation) and the group led by Indira Gandhi came to be called the Congress (Requisitionists).  These two parties were also described as Old Congress and New Congress. Indira Gandhi projected the split as an ideological divide between socialists and conservatives, between the pro-poor and the pro-rich. Abolition of Privy Purse In Chapter One you have read about the integration of the Princely States. This integration was preceded by an assurance that after the dissolution of princely rule,  the then rulers  families would be allowed to retain certain private property, and given a grant in heredity or government allowance, measured on the basis of the extent, revenue and potential of the merging state. This grant was called the privy purse. At the time of accession, there was little criticism of these privileges since integration and consolidation was the primary aim. Yet, hereditary privileges were not consonant with the principles of equality and social and economic justice laid down in the Constitution of India.  Nehru had expressed his dissatisfaction over the matter time and again. Following the 1967 elections, Indira Gandhi supported the demand that the government should abolish privy purses. Morarji Desai, however, called the move morally wrong and amounting to a  breach of faith with the princes. The government tried to bring a Constitutional amendment in 1970, but it was not passed in Rajya Sabha. It then issued an ordinance which was struck down by the Supreme Court. Indira Gandhi made this into a major election issue in 1971 and got a lot of public support. Following its massive victory in the 1971 election, the Constitution was amended to remove legal obstacles for abolition of  privy purse. Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           85 A cartoonist s impression of the leadership rivalry in the Congress Party in 1969. Credit: Vijayan, Shankar s Weekly 20 July 1969 86                                                                   Politics in India since Independence The 1971 Election and Restoration of Congress The split in the Congress reduced Indira Gandhi Government to a minority. Yet her government continued in office with the issue-based support of a few other parties including the Communist Party of India and the DMK. During this period the government made conscious Indira Gandhi vigorously campaigned for implementing the existing land reform laws and  undertook  further land ceiling legislation.  In order to end her dependence on other political parties, strengthen her party s position in the Parliament, and seek a popular mandate for her programmes, Indira Gandhi s government recommended the dissolution of the Lok Sabha in December 1970. This was another surprising and bold move.  The fifth general election to Lok Sabha were held in February 1971. The electoral contest appeared to be loaded against Congress(R). After all, the new Congress was just one faction of an already weak party. Everyone believed that the real organisational strength of the Congress party was under the command of Congress(O). To make matters worse for Indira Gandhi, all the major non-communist, non-Congress opposition parties formed an electoral alliance known as the Grand Alliance. The Samyukta Socialist Party (SSP), Praja Socialist Party (PSP), Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS), Swatantra Party (SWA) and the Bharatiya Kranti Dal (BKD) came together under this umbrella. The ruling party had an alliance with the Communist Party of India (CPI). Yet the new Congress had something that its big opponents lacked   it had an issue, an agenda and a positive slogan. The Grand Alliance did not have a coherent political programme. Indira Gandhi said that the opposition alliance had only one common programme: Indira Hatao (Remove Indira). In contrast to this, she put forward a positive programme captured in the famous slogan: Garibi Hatao (Remove Poverty). She focused on the growth of the public sector, imposition of ceiling on rural land holdings and urban property, removal of disparities in income and opportunity, and abolition of princely privileges. Through garibi hatao Indira Gandhi tried to generate a support base among the disadvantaged, especially among the landless labourers, Dalits and Adivasis, minorities, women and the unemployed youth. The slogan of garibi hatao and the programmes that followed it were part of Indira Gandhi s political strategy of building an independent nationwide political support base. decades after giving the slogan of Garibi Hatao, we still have much poverty around! Was the slogan only an election Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           87 The outcome and after The results of the Lok Sabha elections of 1971, were as dramatic as was the decision to hold these elections.  The Congress(R)-CPI alliance won more seats and votes than the Congress had ever won in the first four general elections. The combine won 375 seats in Lok Sabha and secured 48.4 per cent votes. Indira Gandhi s Congress(R) won 352 seats with about 44 per cent of the popular votes on its own. Contrast this with the performance of the Congress(O): the party with so many stalwarts could get less than one-fourth of the votes secured by Indira Gandhi s party and win merely 16 seats. With this the Congress party led by Indira Gandhi established its claim to being the  real  Congress and restored to it the dominant position in Indian politics. The Grand Alliance of the opposition proved a grand failure. Their combined tally of seats was less than 60.  The Grand Finish  is how a cartoonist interpreted the outcome of the 1971 elections. Players on the ground are the then leading opposition figures. Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India 88                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Soon after the 1971 Lok Sabha elections, a major political and military crisis broke out in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). As you have read in Chapter Four, the 1971 elections were followed by the crisis in East Pakistan and the Indo-Pak war leading to the establishment of Bangladesh. These events added to the popularity of Indira Gandhi. Even the opposition leaders admired her statesmanship. Her party swept through all the State Assembly elections held in 1972. She was seen not only as the protector of the poor and the underprivileged, but also a strong nationalist leader. The opposition to her, either within the party or outside of it, simply did not matter. With two successive election victories, one at the centre and other at the State level, the dominance of the Congress was restored. The Congress was now in power in almost all the States.  It was also popular across different social sections. Within a span of four years, Indira Gandhi had warded off the challenge to her leadership and to the dominant position of the Congress  party. The new manner of choosing CMs by Indira Gandhi inspired this cartoon. Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           89 But does it mean that the Congress system was restored? What Indira Gandhi had done was not a revival of the old Congress party. In many ways she had re-invented the party. The party occupied a similar position in terms of its popularity as in the past. But it was a different kind of a party. It relied entirely on the popularity of the supreme leader. It had a somewhat Congress party now did not have many factions, thus it could not accommodate all kinds of opinions and interests.  While it won elections, it depended more on some social groups: the poor, the women, Dalits, Adivasis and the minorities. This was a new Congress that had emerged. Thus Indira Gandhi restored the Congress system by changing the nature of the Congress system itself. Despite being more popular, the new Congress did not have the kind of capacity to absorb all tensions and conflicts that the Congress consolidated its position and Indira Gandhi assumed a position of unprecedented political authority, the spaces for democratic expression of people s aspirations actually shrank. The popular unrest and mobilisation around issues of development and economic deprivation continued to grow. In the next chapter you will read about how this led to a political crisis that threatened the very existence of constitutional democracy in the country. changing the top and legs of a table and still calling it the old table! What was common between the Old and the New Let s watch a Film Vijay, a young police officer is framed in false charges and sent to jail while fighting gangsters. Released from jail, Vijay is determined to take revenge. He fights all odds and vanquishes the villains. Even while he is engaged in taking revenge, Vijay is fighting the anti-social element and gets the tacit support of many others from within the system. This film portrayed the erosion of moral values and the deep frustrations arising from that quite forcefully. It represents the indifference of the system and the harsh and volcanic eruption of protest through the anger of Vijay. The film set the trend of what was later to be known as the  angry young man  of the Director: Prakash Mehra Screenplay: Salim Khan-Javed Cast: Amitabh Bachchan, Ajit, Jaya Bhaduri, Pran 90                                                                   Politics in India since Independence Which of these statements about the 1967 elections is/are correct? (a)  Congress won the Lok Sabha elections but lost the Assembly elections in many states. Congress lost both Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. (c)  Congress lost majority in the Lok Sabha but formed a coalition government with the support of some other parties. (d)  Congress retained power at the Centre with an increased majority. Match the  following: i.  An elected representative leaving the party on whose ticket s/he has been elected ii.  A catchy phrase that attracts iii.  parties  with different ideological position coming together to oppose Congress and its policies iv. A group of powerful and influential leaders within Whom would you identify with the following slogans/phrases? (a)  Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan (b)  Indira Hatao! (c)  Garibi Hatao! Which of the following statement about the Grand Alliance of 1971 is The Grand Alliance.. was formed by non-Communist, non-Congress parties. (b)  had a clear political and ideological programme. (c)  was formed by all non-Congress parties. How should a political party resolve its internal differences? Here are some suggestions. Think of each and list out their advantages and (a)  Follow the footsteps of the party president (b)  Listen to the majority group (c)  Secret ballot voting on every issue (d)  Consult the senior and experienced leaders of the party State which of these were reasons for  the defeat of the Congress in 1967. Give reasons for your answer. (a) The absence of a charismatic leader in the Congress party (b) Split within the Congress party (c) Increased mobilisation of regional, ethnic and communal groups 90                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           91 (d) Increasing unity among non-Congress parties (e) Internal differences within the Congress party What were the factors which led to the popularity of Indira Gandhi s Government in the early 1970s? 8. What does the term  syndicate  mean in the context of the Congress party of the sixties? What role did the Syndicate play in the Congress Discuss the major issue which led to the formal split of the Congress Party in 1969. 10.	 Read the passage and answer the questions below:  Indira Gandhi changed the Congress into highly cerntalised and undemocratic party organisation, from the earlier federal, democratic and ideological formation that Nehru had led..But this  could not have happened had not Indira Gandhi changed the entire nature of politics. This new, populist politics turned political ideology. into a mere electoral discourse, use of various slogans not meant to be translated into government policies  During its great electoral victories in early 1970s, amidst the celebration, the Congress party as a political organisation died..    Sudipta Kaviraj (a) What according to the author is the difference between the strategies of Nehru and Indira Gandhi? (b) Why does the author say that the Congress party  died  in the (c) In what way, did  the change in the Congress party affect other political parties also? LET US DO IT TOGETHER Make a list of slogans coined by political parties. Do you see any similarities between advertisements and manifestoes, slogans and advertisements of political parties? Have a discussion on how price rise affects the political fortunes of the political parties. Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System                                           91 In this chapter  We have seen in the last chapter that the Congress recovered after 1971, but was not the same kind of party. The difference became clear in a series of events between 1973 and 1975 that brought new challenges to India s democratic politics and the institutional balance sought by the Constitution. These developments led to the imposition of  emergency  in June 1975. Normally, we would associate  emergency  with war and aggression or with natural disaster. But this  emergency  was imposed because of the perceived threat of internal disturbance. The Emergency ended as dramatically as it had begun, resulting in a defeat of the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections of 1977. In this chapter we focus on this crucial phase in the history of democracy in India and ask some questions that have remained controversial after all these years. Why was Emergency imposed? Was it necessary? What did the imposition of Emergency mean in practice? What were the consequences of Emergency on party politics? What are the lessons of Emergency for Indian democracy? The editorial page of  Nai Dunia  of 27 June 1975  was like any other day, except that the space for editorial was left blank. The editorial was  censored  using Many other newspapers also carried such blank to protest against emergency. Later, leaving blank space was also Background to Emergency We have already studied the changes that were taking place in Indian politics since 1967. Indira Gandhi had emerged as a towering leader with tremendous popularity. This was also the period when party competition became bitter and polarised. This period also witnessed tensions in the relationship between the government and the judiciary. The Supreme Court found many initiatives of the government to be violative of the Constitution. The Congress party took the position that this stand of the Court was against principles of democracy and parliamentary supremacy. The Congress also alleged that the Court was a conservative institution and it was becoming an obstacle in the way of implementing pro-poor welfare programmes. The parties opposed to the Congress felt that politics was becoming too personalised and that governmental authority was being converted into personal authority. The split in the Congress had sharpened the divisions between Indira Gandhi and her opponents. In the elections of 1971, Congress had given the slogan of garibi hatao (remove poverty). However, the social and economic condition in the country did not improve much after 1971-72. The Bangladesh crisis had put a heavy strain on India s economy. About eight million people crossed over the East Pakistan border into India. This was followed by war with Pakistan.  After the war the U.S government stopped all aid to India. In the international market, oil prices increased manifold during this period.  This led to an all-round increase in prices of commodities.  Prices increased by 23 per cent in 1973 and 30 per cent in 1974. Such a high level of inflation caused much hardship to Industrial growth was low and unemployment was very high, particularly in the rural areas.  In order to reduce expenditure the government froze the salaries of its employees.  This caused further dissatisfaction among government employees. Monsoons failed in 1972- 1973. This resulted in a sharp decline in agricultural productivity.  Food grain output declined by 8 per cent. The Crisis of 94                                                                 Politics in India since Independence There was a general atmosphere of dissatisfaction with the prevailing economic situation all over the country. In such a context non- Congress opposition parties were able to organise popular protests effectively.  Instances of students  unrests that had persisted from the late 1960s became more pronounced in this period. There was also an increase in the activities of Marxist groups who did not believe in parliamentary politics.  These groups had taken to arms and insurgent techniques for the overthrow of the capitalist order and the established political system. Known as the Marxist-Leninist (now Maoist) groups or Naxalites, they were particularly strong in West Bengal, where the State government took stringent measures to Gujarat and Bihar movements Students  protests in Gujarat and Bihar, both of which were Congress ruled States, had far reaching impact on the politics of the two States and national politics.  In January 1974 students in Gujarat started an agitation against rising prices of food grains, cooking oil and other essential commodities, and against corruption in high places. The students  protest was joined by major opposition parties and became widespread leading to the imposition of President s rule in the state.  The opposition parties demanded fresh elections to the state legislature. Morarji Desai, a prominent leader of Congress (O), who was the main rival of Indira Gandhi when he was in the Congress, announced that he would go on an indefinite fast if fresh elections were not held in the State. Under intense pressure from students, supported by the opposition political parties, assembly elections were held in Gujarat in June 1975. The Congress was defeated in In March 1974 students came together in Bihar to protest against rising prices, food scarcity, unemployment and corruption.  After a point they invited Jayaprakash Narayan (JP), who had given up active politics and was involved in social work, to lead the student movement. He accepted it on the condition that the movement will remain non-violent and will not limit itself to Bihar. Thus the students  character and had national appeal. People from all walks of life now entered the movement.  Jayaprakash Narayan demanded the dismissal of the Congress government in Bihar and gave a call for total revolution in the social, economic and political spheres in order to establish what he considered to be true democracy. A series of bandhs, gehraos, and strikes ab nara hai, bhavi itihas hamara hai [With Total Revolution as our motto, the future belongs to us] A slogan of the Bihar Indira is India, India is Indira A slogan given by D. K. Barooah, President of the people must have had a tough time. What happened to the promise of garibi hatao? The Crisis of Democratic Order Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 16 April 1974 were organised in protest against the Bihar government. The government, however, refused to resign. The movement was beginning to influence national politics. Jayaprakash Narayan wanted to spread the Bihar country. Alongside the agitation led by Jayaprakash Narayan, the employees of the Railways gave a call for a nationwide strike. This threatened to paralyse the country. In 1975, JP led a peoples  march to the Parliament. This was one of the largest political rallies ever held in the capital. He was now supported by the non-Congress opposition parties like the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, the Congress (O), the Bharatiya Lok Dal, the Socialist Party and others. These A marxist in his of the Congress and the Socialist Party; a hero of the 1942 Quit India movement; declined to join Nehru s cabinet; after 1955 quit active politics; became a Gandhian and was involved in the Bhoodan movement, negotiations with the Naga rebels, peace initiative in Kashmir and ensured the surrender of decoits in Chambal; leader of Bihar movement, he became the symbol of opposition to Emergency and was the moving force behind the formation of Janata Party. 96                                                                 Politics in India since Independence parties were projecting JP as an alternative to Indira Gandhi. However, there were many criticisms about his ideas and about the politics of mass agitations that he was employing. Both the Gujarat and Bihar agitations were seen as anti-Congress and rather than opposing the State governments, they were seen as protests against the leadership of Indira Gandhi. She believed that the movement was motivated by personal opposition to her. mean that the judges and government officials should be loyal to the Railway Strike of 1974 What would happen when the railways stop running? Not for one or two days, but for more than a week? Of course, many people would be inconvenienced; but more than that, the economy of the country would come to a halt because goods are transported from one part to another Do you know that such a thing actually happened in 1974? The National Coordination Committee for Railwaymen s Struggle led by George Fernandes gave a call for nationwide strike by all employees of the Railways for pressing their demands related to bonus and service conditions. The government was opposed to these demands. So, the employees of India s largest public sector undertaking went on a strike in May 1974. The strike by the Railway employees added to the atmosphere of labour unrest. It also raised issues like rights of the workers and whether employees of essential services should adopt measures like strikes. The government declared the strike illegal. As the government refused to concede the demands of the striking workers, arrested many of their leaders and deployed the territorial army to protect railway tracks, the strike had to be called off after twenty days without any settlement. Conflict with Judiciary This was also the period when the government and the ruling party had many differences with the judiciary. Do you remember the discussion about the long drawn conflict between the Parliament and the judiciary? You have studied this last year.  Three constitutional issues had emerged. Can the Parliament abridge Fundamental Rights? The Supreme Court said it cannot. Secondly, can the Parliament curtail the right to property by making an amendment? Again, the Court said that Parliament cannot amend the Constitution in such a manner that rights are curtailed. Thirdly, the Parliament amended the Constitution saying that it can abridge Fundamental Rights for giving effect to Directive Principles. But the Supreme Court rejected this provision also. This led to a crisis as far as the relations between the government and the judiciary were concerned. You may remember The Crisis of Democratic Order that this crisis culminated in the famous Kesavananda Bharati Case. In this case, the Court gave a decision that there are some basic features of the Constitution and the Parliament cannot amend these features. Two developments further added to the tension between the judiciary and the executive. Immediately after the Supreme Court s decision in 1973 in the Keshavananda Bharati case, a vacancy arose for the post of the Chief Justice of India. It had been a practice to appoint the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice. But in 1973, the government set aside the seniority of three judges and appointed Justice A. N. Ray as the Chief Justice of India. The appointment became politically controversial because all the three judges who were superseded had given rulings against the stand of the government. Thus, constitutional interpretations and political ideologies were getting mixed up rapidly. People close to the Prime Minister started talking of the need for a judiciary and the bureaucracy  committed  to the vision of the executive and the legislature. The climax of the confrontation was of course the ruling of the High Court declaring Indira Gandhi s Declaration of Emergency On 12 June 1975, Justice Jagmohan Lal Sinha of the Allahabad High Court passed a judgment declaring Indira Gandhi s election to the Lok Sabha invalid. This order came on an election petition filed by Raj Narain, a socialist leader and a candidate who had contested against her in 1971. The petition, challenged the election of Indira Gandhi on the ground that she had used the services of government servants in her election campaign. The judgment of the High Court meant that legally she was no more an MP and therefore, could not remain the Prime Minister unless she was once again elected as an MP within six months. On June 24, the Supreme Court granted her a partial stay on the High Court order   till her appeal was decided, she could remain an MP but could not take part in the proceedings of the Crisis and response The stage was now set for a big political confrontation. The opposition political parties led by Jayaprakash Narayan pressed for Indira Gandhi s resignation and organised a massive demonstration in Delhi s Ramlila grounds on 25 June 1975. Jayaprakash announced a nationwide satyagraha for her resignation and asked the army, the police and government employees not to obey  illegal and immoral orders.  This too threatened to bring the activities of the government to a standstill. The political mood of the country had turned against the Congress, more than ever before. That is like asking the army to disobey the government! Is 98                                                                 Politics in India since Independence The response of the government was to declare a state of emergency. On 25 June 1975, the government declared that there was a threat of internal disturbances and therefore, it invoked Article 352 of the Constitution. Under the provision of this article the government could declare a state of emergency on grounds of external threat or a threat of internal disturbances. The government decided that a grave crisis had arisen which made the proclamation of a state of emergency necessary. Technically speaking this was within the powers of the government, for our Constitution provides for some special powers to the government once an emergency is declared. Once an emergency is proclaimed, the federal distribution of powers remains practically suspended and all the powers are concentrated in the hands of the union government. Secondly, the government also gets the power to curtail or restrict all or any of the Fundamental Rights during the emergency. From the wording of the provisions of the Constitution, it is clear that an Emergency is seen as an This cartoon appeared few days before the declaration of Emergency and captures the sense of impending political crisis. The man behind the chair is D. K. Barooah, the Congress President. Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 26 June 1975 The Crisis of Democratic Order 11 December 1975 100                                                                 Politics in India since Independence The Crisis of Democratic Order extraordinary condition in which normal democratic politics cannot function. Therefore, special powers are granted to the government. On the night of 25 June 1975, the Prime Minister recommended the imposition of Emergency to President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. He issued the proclamation immediately. After midnight, the electricity to all the major newspaper offices was disconnected. In the early morning, a large number of leaders and workers of the opposition parties were arrested. The Cabinet was informed about it at a special meeting at 6 a.m. on 26 June, after all this had taken place. This brought the agitation to an abrupt stop; strikes were banned; many opposition leaders were put in jail; the political situation became very quiet though tense. Deciding to use its special powers under Emergency provisions, the government suspended the freedom of the Press. Newspapers were asked to get prior approval for all material to be published. This is known as press censorship. Apprehending social and communal disharmony, the government banned Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Jamait-e-Islami. Protests and strikes and public agitations were also disallowed.  Most importantly, under the provisions of Emergency, the various Fundamental Rights of citizens stood suspended, including the right of citizens to move the Court for restoring their Fundamental Rights. The government made extensive use of preventive detention. Under this provision, people are arrested and detained not because they have committed any offence, but on the apprehension that they may commit an offence. Using preventive detention acts, the government made large scale arrests during the Emergency.  Arrested political workers could not challenge their arrest through habeas corpus petitions. Many cases were filed in the High Courts and the Supreme Court by and on behalf of arrested persons, but the government claimed that it was not even necessary to inform the arrested persons of the reasons and grounds of their arrest. Several High Courts gave judgments that even after the declaration of Emergency the courts could entertain a writ of habeas corpus filed by a person challenging his/her detention. In April 1976, the constitution bench of the Supreme Court over-ruled the High Courts and accepted the government s plea. It meant that during Emergency the government could take away the citizen s right to life and liberty. This judgment closed the doors of judiciary for the citizens and is regarded as one of the most controversial judgments of the Supreme Court. There were many acts of dissent and resistance to the Emergency. Many political workers who were not arrested in the first wave, went  underground  and organised protests against the government. Newspapers like the Indian Express and the Statesman protested against censorship by leaving blank spaces where news items had been censored. Magazines like the Seminar and the Mainstream gave in! What was happening to everyone in those Emergency without any 102                                                                 Politics in India since Independence talk about the few who protested. What about the rest? All the big officials, and religious leaders, citizens  What were chose to close down rather than submit to censorship. Many journalists were arrested for writing against the Emergency. Many underground newsletters and leaflets were published to bypass censorship. Kannada writer Shivarama Karanth, awarded with Padma Bhushan, and Hindi writer Fanishwarnath Renu, awarded with Padma Shri, returned their awards in protest against the suspension of democracy. By and large, though, such open acts of defiance and resistance were rare. The Parliament also brought in many new changes to the Constitution. In the background of the ruling of the Allahabad High Court in the Indira Gandhi case, an amendment was made declaring that elections of Prime Minister, President and Vice- President could not be challenged in the Court. The forty-second amendment was also passed during the Emergency. You have already studied that this amendment consisted of a series of changes in many parts of the Constitution. Among the various changes made by this amendment, one was that the duration of the legislatures in the country was extended from five to six years. This change was not only for the Emergency period, but was intended to be of a permanent nature. Besides this, during an Emergency, elections can be postponed by one year. Thus, effectively, after 1971, elections needed to be held only in 1978; instead of 1976. Lessons of the Emergency The Emergency at once brought out both the weaknesses and the strengths of India s democracy.  Though there are many observers who think that India ceased to be democratic during the Emergency, it is noteworthy that normal democratic functioning resumed within a short span of time. Thus, one lesson of Emergency is that it is extremely difficult to do away with democracy in India. Secondly, it brought out some ambiguities regarding the Emergency provision in the Constitution that have been rectified since. Now,  internal  Emergency can be proclaimed only on the grounds of  armed rebellion  and it is necessary that the  advice to the President to proclaim Emergency must be given in writing  by the Thirdly, the Emergency made everyone more aware of the value of civil liberties. The Courts too, have taken an active role after the Emergency in protecting the civil liberties of the individuals. This is a response to the inability of the   death of D. E. M. O Cracy, mourned by his wife T. Ruth, his son L. I. Bertie, and his daughters Faith, Hope and advertisement in the Times of India, soon after the declaration of Emergency, Today is India s Let the Lights Go Out on An advertisement in The 15 August 1975 by  Free JP Campaign. The Crisis of Democratic Order judiciary to protect civil liberties effectively during the emergency. Many civil liberties organisations came up after this experience. However, the critical years of emergency brought many issues that have not been adequately grappled with. We have noted in this chapter that there is a tension between routine functioning of a democratic government and the continuous political protests by parties and groups. What is the correct balance between the two? Should the citizens have full freedom to engage in protest activity or should they have no such right at all? What are the limits to such a Secondly, the actual implementation of the Emergency rule took place through the police and the administration. These institutions could not function independently. They were turned into political instruments of the ruling party and according to the Shah Commission Report, the administration and the police became vulnerable to political pressures. This problem did not vanish after the Emergency. Politics after Emergency The most valuable and lasting lesson of the Emergency was learnt as soon as the Emergency was over and the Lok Sabha elections were announced. The 1977 elections turned into a referendum on the experience of the Emergency, at least in north India where the impact of the Emergency was felt most strongly. The opposition fought the election on the slogan of  save democracy. The people s verdict was decisively against the Emergency. The lesson was clear and has been reiterated in many state level governments that are perceived to be anti-democratic are severely punished by the voters. In this sense the experience of 1975 77 ended up strengthening the foundations of democracy in India. Lok Sabha Elections, 1977 In January 1977, after eighteen months of Emergency, the government decided to hold elections.  Accordingly, all the leaders and activists were released from jails. Elections were held in March 1977. This left the opposition with very little time, but political developments took place very rapidly. The major opposition parties had already been coming closer in the pre-Emergency period. Now they came together on the eve of the elections and formed a new party, known as the Janata Party. The new party accepted the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan. Some leaders of the Congress who were opposed to the Emergency also joined this new party. fighter; a Gandhian leader; Proponenet of Khadi, naturopathy and prohibition; Chief Minister of Bombay State; Deputy Prime Minister (1967- 1969); joined Congress (O) after the split in the party; Prime Minister from 1977 to 1979 first Prime Minister belonging to a 104                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Some other Congress leaders also came out and formed a separate party under the leadership of Jagjivan Ram. This party named as Congress for Democracy, later merged with the Janata Party. The Janata Party made this election into a referendum on the Emergency. Its campaign was focused on the non-democratic character of the rule and on the various excesses that took place during this period. In the backdrop of arrests of thousands of persons and the censorship of the Press, the public opinion was against the Congress. Jayaprakash Narayan became the popular symbol of restoration of democracy. The formation of the Janata Party also ensured that non- Congress votes would not be divided. It was evident that the going was tough for the Congress. Yet the final results took everyone by surprise. For the first time since Independence, the Congress party was defeated in the Lok Sabha elections.  The Congress could win only 154 seats in the Lok Sabha. Its share of popular votes fell to less than 35 per cent.  The Janata Party and its allies won 330 out of the 542 seats in the Lok Sabha; Janata Party itself won 295 seats and thus enjoyed a clear majority. In north India, it was a massive electoral wave against the Congress. The Congress lost in every constituency in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and the Punjab and could win only one seat each in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. Indira Gandhi was defeated from Rae Bareli, as was her son Sanjay Gandhi from Amethi. Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India 29 March 1977 reading of who won and what was defeated in the 1977 election. with the common and Atal Behari The Crisis of Democratic Order But if you look at the map showing the result of this election, you will notice that Congress did not lose elections all over the country. It retained many seats in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Orissa and virtually swept through the southern States. There are many reasons for this. To begin with, the impact of Emergency was not felt equally in all the States. The forced relocation and displacements, the forced sterilisations, were mostly concentrated in the northern States. But more importantly, north India had experienced some long term changes in the nature of political competition. The middle castes from north India were beginning to move away from the Congress and the Janata party became a platform for many of these sections to come together. In this sense, the elections of 1977 were not merely about The Janata Party government that came to power after the 1977 elections was far from cohesive. After the election, there was stiff competition among three leaders for the post of Prime Minister   Morarji Desai, who was the rival to Indira Gandhi ever since 1966-67; Charan Singh, leader of the Bharatiya Lok Dal and a farmers  leader from UP; and Jagjivan Ram, who had vast experience as a senior minister in the Congress governments. Eventually Morarji Desai became the Prime Minister but that did not bring the power struggle within the party to an end. Oath taking by the first non-congress government at the centre in 1977. In the picture are Jayaprakash Narayan, J. B. Kriplani, Morarji Desai and Atal Behari Vajpayee. 106                                                                 Politics in India since Independence we talk about a mandate or verdict in 1977 when the north and the south voted so Read this map and identify the states where   	 Congress lost,   	 Congress lost very badly and   	 those states where Congress and its allies nearly swept the polls. Which are the constituencies in north India that the Congress managed to win? Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India s external boundaries. The Crisis of Democratic Order of India between July1979 - January in the politics of proponent of rural Dal in 1967; twice of U.P.; later he was one of the founders of the Janata Party in 1977 and became Credit: R. K. Laxman in The Times of India, 13 November 1979 Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India Janata Party s faction fight inspired many cartoons at that time. Here is a selection. Credit: Atanu Roy/India Today I got it! was like a was painful and caused fever, but 108                                                                 Politics in India since Independence The opposition to emergency could keep the Janata Party together only for a while. Its critics felt that the Janata Party  lacked direction, leadership, and a common programme. The Janata Party government could not bring about a fundamental change in policies from those pursued by the Congress. The Janata Party split and the government which was led by Morarji Desai lost its majority in less than 28 months.  Another government headed by Charan Singh was formed on the assurance of the support of the Congress party.  But the Congress party later decided to withdraw its support with the result that the Charan Singh government could remain in power for just about 4 months.  Fresh Lok Sabha elections were held in January 1980 in which the Janata Party suffered a comprehensive defeat, especially in north India where it had swept the polls in 1977.  Congress party led by Indira Gandhi nearly repeated its great victory in 1971. It won 353 seats and came back to power. The experience of governments that are seen to be unstable and quarrelsome are severely punished by the voters. But was it only a case of return of Indira Gandhi? Between the elections of 1977 and 1980 the party system had changed dramatically.  Since 1969, the Congress party had starting leaders and workers of different ideological dispensations and view points.  The Congress party now identified itself with a particular ideology, claiming to be the only socialist and pro-poor party.  Thus with the early nineteen seventies, the Congress s political success depended on attracting people on the basis of sharp social and ideological divisions and the appeal of one leader, Indira Gandhi. With the change in the nature of the Congress party, other opposition parties relied more and more on what is known in Indian politics as  non-Congressism. They also realised the need to avoid a division of non-Congress votes in the election. This factor played a major role in the elections In an indirect manner the issue of welfare of the backward castes also began to dominate politics since 1977. As we saw above, the results of 1977 elections were at least partly due to a shift among the backward castes of north India. Following the Lok Sabha elections, many states also held Assembly elections in 1977. Again, the northern States elected non-Congress governments in which the leaders of the backward castes played an important role. The issue of reservations for  other backward classes  became very controversial in Bihar and following this, the Mandal Commission was appointed by the Janata party Freedom fighter and Congress leader from Bihar; Deputy Prime Minister of India a Member of 1952 till his death; Labour Minister in the first ministry of free India; held various other ministries from 1952 to 1977; a scholar and astute The Crisis of Democratic Order Credit: India Today Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India This cartoon appeared after the election results of 1980. government at the centre. You will read more about this and about the role of the politics of backward castes, in the last chapter. The elections after the Emergency set off the process of this change in the The Emergency and the period around it can be described as a period of constitutional crisis because it had its origins in the constitutional battle over the jurisdiction of the Parliament and the judiciary. On the other hand, it was also a period of political crisis. The 110                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Let s watch a Film Hazaron Khwaishein Aisi Siddharth, Vikram and Geeta are three spirited and socially engaged students. Graduating from Delhi, they follow different paths. While Siddharth is a strong supporter of the revolutionary ideology of social transformation, Vikram is in favour of achieving success in life, whatever the cost. The film narrates the story of their journeys towards their goals and the underlying disappointments. The film is set in the backdrop of the seventies. The young characters are products of the expectations and idealism of that period. Siddharth is not successful in his ambition to stage a revolution, but is so involved in the plight of the poor that he begins valuing their uplift more than revolution. On the other hand, Vikram becomes a typical political fixer but is constantly ill at ease. Director: Sudhir Mishra Screenplay: Sudhir Mishra Cast: Kay Kay Menon, Shiney Ahuja, Chitrangada Singh party in power had absolute majority and yet, its leadership decided to suspend the democratic process. The makers of India s Constitution trusted that all political parties would basically abide by the democratic norm. Even during the Emergency, when the government would use extraordinary powers, its use would be within the norms of the rule of law. This expectation led to the wide and open ended powers given to the government in times of Emergency. These were abused during the Emergency. This political crisis was more serious than the constitutional crisis. Another critical issue that emerged during this period was the role and extent of mass protests in a parliamentary democracy. There was clearly a tension between institution-based democracy and democracy based on spontaneous popular participation. This tension may be attributed to the inability of the party system to incorporate the aspirations of the people. In the next chapter we shall study some of the manifestations of this tension, in particular, debates around The Crisis of Democratic Order 1.	 State whether the following statements regarding the Emergency are correct or incorrect. (a)	 It was declared in 1975 by Indira Gandhi. (b)	 It led to the suspension of all fundamental rights. (c)	 It was proclaimed due to the deteriorating economic conditions. (d) Many Opposition leaders were arrested during the emergency. (e)	 CPI supported the proclamation of the Emergency. 2.	 Find the odd one out in the context of proclamation of Emergency (a)	 The call for  Total Revolution. (b)	 The Railway Strike of 1974 (c)	 The Naxalite Movement (d)	 The Allahbad High Court verdict (e)	 The findings of the Shah Commission Report 3.	 Match the following (a) 	Total Revolution               	 i. (b) 	Garibi hatao                     	 ii.	 Jayaprakash Narayan (c) 	Students  Protest             	 iii.	 Bihar Movement (d) 	Railway Strike                  	 iv.	 George Fernandes 4. What were the reasons which led to the mid-term elections in 1980? 5.	 The Shah Commission was appointed in 1977 by the Janata Party Government. Why was it appointed and what were its findings? 6.	 What reasons did the Government give for declaring a National Emergency in 1975? 7. The 1977 elections for the first time saw the Opposition coming into power at the Centre. What would you consider as the reasons for this 8.	 Discuss the effects of Emergency on the following aspects of our polity. Effects on civil liberties for citizens. Impact on relationship between the Executive and Judiciary Functioning of Mass Media Working of the Police and Bureaucracy. 9.	 In what way did the imposition of Emergency affect the party system in India? Elaborate your answer with examples. 10.	Read the passage and answer the questions below: Indian democracy was never so close to a two-party system as it was during the 1977 elections. However, the next few years saw a complete change. Soon after its defeat, the Indian National Congress split into two groups..        The Janata Party also went through major convulsions..David Butler, Ashok Lahiri and Prannoy Roy.    Partha (a)	 What made the party system in India look like a two-party system in (b)	 Many more than two parties existed in 1977. Why then are the authors describing this period as close to a two-party system? (c) What caused splits in Congress and the Janata parties? The Crisis of Democratic Order In this chapter  In the first chapter of this book we studied the process of  nation-building  in the first decade after Independence. But nation-building is not something that can be accomplished once and for all times to come. In the course of time new challenges came up. Some of the old problems had never been fully resolved. As democratic experiment unfolded, people from different regions began to express their aspirations for autonomy. Sometimes these aspirations were expressed outside the framework of the Indian union. These involved long struggles and often aggressive and armed assertions by the people. This new challenge came to the fore in the 1980s, as the Janata experiment came to an end and there was some political stability at the centre. This decade will be remembered for some major conflicts and accords in the various regions of the country, especially in Assam, the Punjab, Mizoram and the developments in Jammu and Kashmir. In this chapter we study these cases so as to ask some general questions. Which factors contribute to the tensions arising out of regional aspirations? How has the Indian state responded to these tensions and challenges? What kind of difficulties are faced in balancing democratic rights and national What are the lessons here for achieving unity with diversity in a democracy? are usually expressed in the language of the region and addressed to the local population or the rulers. This unusual poster from appeals to all the Indian citizens in seven and thus underscores the compatibility of the regional aspirations with Region and the Nation 1980s may be seen as a period of rising regional aspirations for autonomy, often outside the framework of the Indian Union.  These movements frequently involved armed assertions by the people, their repression by the government, and a collapse of the political and electoral processes.  It is also not surprising that most of these struggles were long drawn and concluded in negotiated settlements or accords between the central government and the groups leading the movement for autonomy. The accords were reached after a process of dialogue that aimed to settle contentious issues within the constitutional framework.  Yet the journey to the accord was always tumultuous and often violent. In studying the Indian Constitution and the process of nation-building we have repeatedly come across one basic principle of the Indian approach to diversity   the Indian nation shall not deny the rights of different regions and linguistic groups to retain their own culture. We decided to live a united social life without losing the distinctiveness of the numerous cultures that constituted it.  Indian nationalism sought to balance the principles of unity and diversity. The nation would not mean the negation of the region. In this sense the Indian approach was very different from the one adopted in many European countries where they saw cultural diversity as a threat to the nation. India adopted a democratic approach to the question of diversity. Democracy allows the political expressions of regional aspirations and does not look upon them as anti-national. Besides, democratic politics allows parties and groups to address the people on the basis of their regional identity, aspiration and specific regional problems. Thus, in the course of democratic politics, regional aspirations get strengthened. At the same time, democratic politics also means that regional issues and problems will receive adequate attention and accommodation in the policy making process. Such an arrangement may sometimes lead to tensions and problems. Sometimes, the concern for national unity may overshadow the regional needs Does it mean that regionalism is not as dangerous as communalism? Or may be, not dangerous at 114                                                                 Politics in India since Independence and aspirations.  At other times a concern for region alone may blind us to the larger needs of the nation. Therefore, political conflicts over issues of power of the regions, their rights and their separate existence are common to nations that want to respect diversity while trying to forge and retain unity. Areas of tension In the first chapter you have seen how immediately after Independence our nation had to cope with many difficult issues like Partition, displacement, integration of Princely States, reorganisation of states and so on. Many observers, both within the country and from outside, had predicted that India as one unified country cannot last long. Soon after Independence, the issue of Jammu and Kashmir came up. It was not only a conflict between India and Pakistan. More than that, it was a question of the political aspirations of the people of Kashmir valley. Similarly, in some parts of the north-east, there was no consensus about being a part of India. First Nagaland and then Mizoram witnessed strong movements demanding separation from India. In the south, some groups from the Dravid movement briefly toyed with the idea of a separate country. These events were followed by mass agitations in many parts for the formation of linguistic States. Today s Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat were among the regions affected by these agitations. In some parts of southern India, particularly Tamil Nadu, there were protests against making Hindi the official national language of the country. In the north, there were strong pro-Hindi agitations demanding that Hindi be made the official language immediately. From the late 1950s, people speaking the Punjabi language started agitating for a separate State for themselves. This demand was finally accepted and the States of Punjab and Haryana were created in 1966. Later, the States of Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand were created. Thus the challenge of diversity was met by redrawing the internal boundaries of the country. Yet this did not lead to resolution of all problems and for all times. In some regions, like Kashmir and Nagaland, the challenge was so complex that it could not be resolved in the first phase of nation-building. Besides, new challenges came up in States like Punjab, Assam and Mizoram. Let us study these cases in some detail. In this process let us also go back to some of the earlier instances of difficulties of nation building. The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding of India s future. Why does the come from the border Jammu and Kashmir As you have studied in the previous year, Jammu and Kashmir had a special status under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution. However, in spite of it, Jammu and Kashmir border terrorism and political It also resulted in the loss of many lives including that of Besides, there was also a large scale displacement of Kashmiri Pandits from the comprises three social and Kashmir and Ladakh. The Jammu region is a mix of foothills and plains. It is predominantly inhabited by the Hindus.  Muslims, Sikhs and people of other denominations also reside in this region. The Kashmir region mainly comprises of the Kashmir valley. It is inhabited mostly by Kashmiri Muslims with the remaining being Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and others. The Ladakh region is mainly mountainous. It has very little population which is almost equally divided between Buddhists and Muslims. Roots of the Problem Before 1947, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was a Princely State. Its ruler, Maharaja Hari Singh did not want to merge either with India or Pakistan but to have an independent status for his state. The Pakistani leaders thought that Kashmir region  belonged  to Pakistan, since the majority population of the State was Muslim. But this is not how the people of the state themselves saw it  they thought of themselves as Kashmiris above all. This issue of regional aspiration is known as Kashmiriyat. The popular movement in the State, led by Sheikh Abdullah of the National Conference, wanted to get rid of the Maharaja, but was against joining Pakistan. The National Conference was a secular organisation and had a long association with the Congress. Sheikh Abdullah was a personal friend of some of the leading nationalist leaders including Nehru. Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh 116                                                                 Politics in India since Independence  Vadakku Vaazhgiradhu; Therkku Thaeikiradhu  [The north thrives even as the south decays]. This popular slogan sums up the dominant sentiments of one of India s most effective regional movements, the Dravidian movement, at one point of time. This was one of the first regional movements in Indian politics. Though some sections of this movement had ambitions of creating a Dravida nation, the movement did not take to arms.  It used democratic means like public debates and the electoral platform to achieve its ends. This strategy paid off as the movement acquired political power in the State and also became influential at the national level. The Dravidian movement led to the formation of Dravidar Kazhagam [DK] under the leadership of  Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami  Periyar. The organisation strongly opposed the Brahmins  dominance and affirmed regional pride against the political, economic and cultural domination of the North. Initially, the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the movement to Tamil Nadu. The DK split and the political legacy of the Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK). The DMK made its with a three pronged First, it demanded the restoration of the original name of Kallakudi railway station which had been after an industrial house from the North.  This demand brought out its opposition to the North Indian economic and cultural symbols. The second agitation was for o th Ind atheism; famous for his anti- caste struggle and rediscovery of Dravidian identity; initially a worker of the Congress party; started the self-respect movement (1925); led the worked for the Justice party and later founded Dravidar Kazhagam; opposed to Hindi and domination of north India; propounded the thesis that north Indians and Brahmins Anti-Hindi agitation in Tamil Nadu, 1965 Credit: The Hindu giving Tamil cultural history greater importance in school curricula. The third agitation was against the craft education scheme of the State government, which it alleged was linked to the Brahmanical social outlook. It also agitated against making Hindi the country s official language. The success of the anti-Hindi agitation of 1965 added to the Sustained political agitations brought the DMK to power in the Assembly elections of 1967. Since then, the Dravidian parties have dominated the politics of Tamil Nadu. Though  the DMK split after the death of its leader, C. Annadurai,  the influence of Dravidian parties in Tamil politics actually increased. After the split there were two parties   the DMK and the All India Anna DMK (AIADMK)   that claimed Dravidian legacy. Both these parties have dominated politics in Tamil Nadu for the last four decades. Since 1996, one of these parties has been a part of the ruling coalition at the Centre. In the 1990s, many other parties have emerged. These include Marumalarchchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) and Desiya Murpokku Dravidar Kazhagam (DMDK). All these parties have kept alive the issue of regional pride in the politics of Tamil Nadu. Initially seen as a threat to Indian nationalism, regional politics in Tamil Nadu is a good example of the compatibility of regionalism and nationalism. 118                                                                 Politics in India since Independence In October 1947, Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced the the military support and drove back the infiltrators from Kashmir valley, but only after the Maharaja had signed an  Instrument of Accession  with the Government of India. However, as Pakistan continued to control a sizeable part of the state, the issue was taken to the United Nations Organisation, which in its resolution dated 21 April 1948 recommended a three step process to resolve the issue. Firstly, Pakistan had to withdraw its entire nationalities, who entered into Kashmir. Secondly, India needed to progressively reduce its forces so as to maintain law and order. Thirdly, a plebiscite was to be conducted in a free and impartial manner. However, no progress could be achieved under this resolution. In the meanwhile, Sheikh Abdullah took over as the Prime Minister of the State of J&K in March 1948 while India agreed to grant it provisional autonomy under the Article 370. The head of the government in the State was then called Prime Minister. Leader of Jammu Jammu and Kashmir; led the popular struggle against princely rule; opposed to Pakistan due to its non-secular character; leader of the National Conference; Prime Minister of J&K immediately after its accession with India in 1947; dismissed and jailed by Government of India from 1953 to 1964 and again from 1965 to 1968; became Chief Minister of the State after an agreement with Indira Gandhi in 1974. Credit: Hindustan Times External and internal disputes Since then the politics of Jammu and conflict-ridden both for external and internal reasons. Externally, Pakistan has always claimed that Kashmir valley should be part of Pakistan. As we noted above, Pakistan sponsored a tribal invasion of the State in 1947, as a consequence of which one part of the State came under Pakistani control. However, it is the Indian territory which is under illegal occupation of Pakistan called as Pakistan occupied Jammu and Kashmir (POJK). Ever since 1947, Kashmir has remained a major issue of conflict between India and Pakistan. Internally, there is a dispute about the status of Kashmir within Indian union. You have studied about the special provisions under Articles 370 and 371 last year in Indian Constitution at Work. This special status had provoked two opposite reactions. There is a section of people outside of J&K that believed that the special status of the State conferred by Article 370 did not allow full integration of the State with India. This section felt that Article 370 be revoked and J&K be treated like any other state of India. Another section, mostly Kashmiris, believe that the autonomy conferred by Article 370 is not enough.  They had at least three major grievances. First, the promise that Accession would be referred to the people of the State after the situation created by tribal invasion was normalised, has not been fulfilled. This generated the demand for a plebiscite. Secondly, there was a feeling that the special federal status guaranteed by Article 370, had been eroded in practice. This had led to the demand for restoration of autonomy or  Greater State Autonomy. Thirdly, it was felt that democracy which is practiced in the rest of India has not been similarly institutionalised in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Let s watch a Film Tamil film depicting the travails of Roja, a newly wed and doting wife when her husband, Rishi,  is abducted by militants. Rishi is a cryptologist who is assigned duty in Kashmir to decode the enem s messages. As love blossoms between the husband and the wife, the husband is kidnapped. The kidnappers demand that their jailed leader, be set free in exchange of Rishi. Roja s world is shattered and she is seen knocking at the doors of officials and politicians. Since the film has the background of Indo- Pakistan dispute, it made instant appeal. The film was dubbed in Hindi and many other Indian Cast (Hindi version): Madhu, Arvind Swamy, Pankaj Kapoor, 120                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Politics since 1948 After taking over as the Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah initiated major land reforms and other policies which benefitted ordinary people. But there was a growing difference between him and the central government about his position on Kashmir s status. He was dismissed in 1953 and kept in detention for a number of years. The leadership that succeeded him did not enjoy as much popular support and was able to rule the State mainly due to the support of the Centre. There were serious allegations of malpractices and rigging in various elections. During most of the period between 1953 and 1974, the Congress party exercised influence on the politics of the State. A truncated National Conference (minus Sheikh Abdullah) remained in power with the active support of Congress for some time but later it merged with the Congress. Thus, the Congress gained direct control over the government in the state and brought about the changes. In the meanwhile, there were several attempts to reach an agreement between Sheikh Abdullah and the Government of India. A change in the provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir was made in 1965 by which the Prime Minister of the state was designated as Chief Minister of the state. Accordingly, Ghulam Mohammed Sadiq of the Indian National Congress became the first Chief Minister of the state. Credit: The Times of India In 1974 Indira Gandhi reached an agreement with Sheikh Abdullah and he became the Chief Minister of the State. He revived the National Conference which was elected with majority in the assembly elections held in 1977. Sheikh Abdullah died in 1982 and the leadership of the National Conference went to his son, Farooq Abdullah, who became the Chief Minister. But he soon was dismissed by the Governor and a breakaway faction of the National Conference came to power for a The dismissal of Farooq Abdullah s government due to the intervention of the Centre generated a feeling of resentment in Kashmir. The confidence that Kashmiris had developed in the democratic processes after the accord between Indira Gandhi and Sheikh Abdullah, received a setback. The feeling that the Centre was intervening in politics of the State was further strengthened when the National Conference in 1986 agreed to have an electoral alliance with the Congress, the ruling party in the Centre. Insurgency and After It was in this environment that the 1987 Assembly election took place. The official results showed a massive victory of the National Conference  Congress alliance and Farooq Abdullah returned as Chief Minister. But it was widely believed that the results did not reflect popular choice, and that the entire election process was rigged. A popular resentment had already been brewing in the State against the inefficient administration since early 1980s. This was now augmented by the commonly prevailing feeling that democratic processes were being undermined by the state at the behest of the Centre. This generated a political crisis in Kashmir which became severe with the rise of insurgency. By 1989, the State had come in the grip of a militant movement mobilised around the cause of a separate Kashmiri nation. The insurgents got moral, material and military support from Pakistan. For a number of years the State was under President s rule and effectively under the control of the armed forces. Throughout the period from 1990, Jammu and Kashmir experienced extraordinary violence at the hands of the insurgents and through army action. Assembly elections in the State were held only in 1996 in which the National Conference led by Farooq Abdullah came to power with a demand for regional autonomy for Jammu and Kashmir. At the end of its term, elections were held in the State in 2002. The National Conference failed to win a majority and was replaced by a coalition government of People s Democratic Party (PDP) and Congress. 2002 and Beyond As per the coalition agreement, Mufti Mohammed headed the government for the first three years succeeded by Ghulam Nabi Azad 122                                                                 Politics in India since Independence of the Indian National Congress who however could not complete the term as president rule was imposed in the state in July 2008. The next election was held in November-December 2008. Another coalition government (composed of NC and INC) came into power headed by Omar Abdullah in 2009.  However, the state continued to witness disturbances led by the Hurriyat Conference. In 2014, the state went into another election, which recorded the highest voters  turnout in 25 years. Consequently a coalition government led by Mufti Mohammed Sayeed of the PDP came into power with the BJP as its partner. After Mufti Mohammed Sayeed died, his daughter Mahbooba Mufti became the first woman Chief Minister of the state in April 2016. During the tenure of Mahbooba Mufti, major acts of terrorism, mounting external and internal tensions were witnessed. The President s rule was imposed in June 2018 after BJP withdrew its support to the Mufti government. On 5 August 2019, Article 370 was abolished by the Jammu & Kashmir Reorganisation Act 2019 and the state was constituted into two Union Territories, viz., Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh are living examples of plural society in India. Not only are there diversities of all kind (religious, cultural, linguistic, ethnic and tribal) but there are also divergent political and developmental aspirations, which have been sought to be achieved by the latest Act. The decade of 1980s also witnessed major developments in the State of Punjab. The social composition of the State changed first with Partition and later on after the carving out of Haryana and Himachal Pradesh.  While the rest of the country was reorganised on linguistic lines in 1950s, Punjab had to wait till 1966 for the creation of a Punjabi speaking State. The Akali Dal, which was formed in 1920 as the political wing of the Sikhs, had led the movement for the formation of a  Punjabi suba. The Sikhs were now a majority in the truncated State of Punjab. After the reorganisation, the Akalis came to power in 1967 and then in 1977. On both the occasions it was a coalition government. The Akalis discovered that despite the redrawing of the boundaries, their political position remained precarious. Firstly, their government was dismissed by the Centre mid-way through its term. Secondly, they did not enjoy strong support among the Hindus. Thirdly, the Sikh community, like all other religious communities, was internally differentiated on caste and class lines. The Congress got more support among the Dalits, whether Hindu or Sikh, than the Akalis. Master Tara Singh religious and political leader;   one of the early leaders of the leader of the Akali of the freedom opposed to Congress  policy of negotiating only with the Muslims; he was the senior most advocate of formation of separate is all about leaders, terrorists  but what about the people in Jammu and Kashmir? In a democracy we must go by what they want, It was in this context that during the 1970s a section of Akalis began to demand political autonomy for the region. This was reflected in a resolution passed at their conference at Anandpur Sahib in 1973. The Anandpur Sahib Resolution asserted regional autonomy and wanted to redefine centre-state relationship in the country. The resolution also spoke of the aspirations of the Sikh qaum (community or nation) and declared its goal as attaining the bolbala (dominance or hegemony) of the Sikhs. The Resolution was a plea for strengthening federalism in India. The Resolution had a limited appeal among the Sikh masses. A few years later, after the Akali government had been dismissed in 1980, the Akali Dal launched a movement on the question of the distribution of water between Punjab and its neighbouring States. A section of the religious leaders raised the question of autonomous Cycle of violence Soon, the leadership of the movement passed from the moderate Akalis to the extremist elements and took the form of armed insurgency. These militants made their headquarters inside the Sikh holy shrine, the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and turned it into an armed fortress. In June 1984, the Government of India carried out  Operation Blue Star, code name for army action in the Golden Temple. In this operation, the government could successfully flush out the militants, but it also damaged the historic temple and deeply hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs. A large proportion of Sikhs in India and abroad saw the military operation as an attack on their faith and this gave further impetus to militant and extremist groups. Still more tragic turn of events complicated the Punjab problem further. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated on 31 October 1984  outside her residence by her While the entire country was shocked by this development, in Delhi and in many parts of northern India violence broke out against the violence against the Sikhs leader; began his in mid-sixties as an Akali leader; of Akali Dal in 1980; reached an Rajiv Gandhi on 124                                                                 Politics in India since Independence continued for almost a week. More than two thousand Sikhs were killed in the national capital, the area worst affected by this violence. Hundreds of Sikhs were killed in other parts of the country, especially in places like Kanpur, Bokaro and Chas. Many Sikh families lost their male members and thus suffered great emotional and heavy financial loss. What hurt the Sikhs most was that the government took a long time in restoring normalcy and that the perpetrators of this violence were not effectively punished. Twenty years later, speaking in the Parliament in Singh expressed regret over these killings and apologised to the nation for the anti-Sikh violence. ere is also evidence to show that on 31-10-84 either meet were held or persons wh could organise att were contacted and were given instructions to kill Sikhs and loot acks were made in a sy and without much fear the police, almost ting that they ured that they be harmed wh ing those acts or Commission of Inquiry, Report, Vol. I, 2005 Women looking at a wall painting depicting Indira Gandhi s assassination. Credit: Raghu Rai Road to peace After coming to power following the election in 1984, the new Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi initiated a dialogue with moderate Akali leaders. In July 1985, he reached an agreement with Harchand Singh Longowal, then the President of the Akali Dal. This agreement, known as the Rajiv Gandhi - Longowal Accord or the Punjab Accord, was a step towards bringing normalcy to Punjab. It was agreed that Chandigarh would be transferred to Punjab, a separate commission would be appointed to resolve the border dispute between Punjab and Haryana, and a tribunal would be set up to decide the sharing of Ravi-Beas river water among Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The agreement also provided for compensation to and better treatment of those affected by the militancy in Punjab and the withdrawal of the application of Armed Forces Special Powers Act in Punjab. However, peace did not come easily or immediately. The cycle of violence continued nearly for a decade. Militancy and counter insurgency violence led to excesses by the police and violations of human rights. Politically, it led to fragmentation of the Akali Dal. The central government had to impose President s rule in the State and the normal electoral and political process was suspended. It was not easy to restore the political process in the atmosphere of suspicion and violence. When elections were held in Punjab in 1992, only 24 per cent of the electors tuned out to vote. Militancy was eventually eradicated by the security forces.  But the losses incurred by the people of Punjab   Sikhs and Hindus alike   were enormous.  Peace returned to Punjab by the middle of 1990s. The alliance of Akali Dal (Badal) and the BJP scored a major victory in1997, in the first normal elections in the State in the post-militancy era. The State is once again preoccupied with questions of economic development and social change.  Though religious identities continue to be important for the people, politics has gradually moved back along secular lines. the Sikh community but the wh took place in 1984 is the negation of at is enshrined in our Constitution. So, I am not on any false pres On behalf of Government, on behalf the entire people of this country, I bow my head in shame that such thing took place. But, Sir, there are ebbs, there are tides past is with us.  We past.  But as human beings, we have the willpower and we have the ability to write er future for all Dr. Manmohan Singh intervening in Rajya Sabha debate on 11 August 2005 The Times of out a special edition on the Credit: Times of India 126                                                                 Politics in India since Independence In the North-East, regional aspirations reached a turning point in 1980s. This region now consists of eight States. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Meghalaya, which earlier constituted the North-East region, are often called  the seven sisters. Sikkim, which has been added to the list is  referred to as the  Brother  to those seven states. The region has only 4 per cent of the country s population but about twice as much share of its area. A small corridor of about 22 kilometers connects the region to the rest of the country. Otherwise the region shares boundaries with China, Myanmar and Bangladesh and serves as India s gateway to South East Asia. The region has witnessed a lot of change since 1947. Tripura, Manipur and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya were erstwhile Princely States which merged with India after Independence. The entire region of North-East has undergone considerable political reorganisation. Nagaland State was created in 1963; Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya in 1972 while Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh became separate States only in 1987. The Partition of India in 1947 had reduced the North-East to a land locked region and affected its economy. Cut off from the rest of India, the region suffered neglect in developmental terms. Its politics too remained insulated. At the same time, most States in this region underwent major demographic changes due to influx of migrants from neighbouring States and countries. The isolation of the region, its complex social character and its backwardness compared to other parts of the country have all  resulted in the complicated set of demands from different states of the North-East. The vast international border and weak communication between the North-East and the rest of India have further added to the delicate nature of politics there. Three issues dominate the politics of North-East: demands for autonomy, movements for secession, and  opposition to   outsiders. Major initiatives on the first issue in the 1970s set the stage for some dramatic developments on the second and the third in the 1980s. Demands for autonomy At independence the entire region except Manipur and Tripura comprised the State of Assam. Demands for political felt that the Assam government was imposing Assamese language on them. Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India s There were opposition and protest riots throughout the State. Leaders of the major tribal communities wanted to separate from Assam. They formed the Eastern India Tribal Union which later transformed into a more comprehensive All Party Hill Leaders Conference in 1960. They demanded a tribal State to be carved out of Assam. Finally instead of one tribal State, several States got carved out of Assam. At different points of time the Central Government had to create Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh out of Assam. Tripura and Manipur were upgraded into States too. The reorganisation of the North-East was completed by 1972. But this was not the end of autonomy demands in this region. In Assam, for example, communities like the Bodos, Karbis and Dimasas wanted separate States. They worked for this demand by mobilising public opinion and popular movement as well as through insurgency. Often the same area was claimed by more than one community. It was not possible to go on making smaller and yet smaller States. Therefore, some other provisions of our federal set up were used to satisfy their autonomy demands while remaining in Assam. Karbis and Dimasas have been granted autonomy under District Councils while Bodos were recently granted Autonomous Council. Demands for autonomy were easier to respond to, for these involved using the various provisions in the Constitution for accommodation of diversities. It was much more difficult when some groups demanded a separate country, not in momentary anger but consistently as a principled position. The country s leadership faced this problem for a very long time in at least two States in the North-East. A comparison of these two cases offers us a lesson in democratic politics. After independence, the Mizo Hills area was made an autonomous district within Assam. Some Mizos believed that they were never a part of British India and therefore did not belong to the Indian union. But the movement for secession gained popular support after the Assam government failed to respond adequately to the great famine of 1959 in Mizo hills. The Mizos  anger led to the formation of the Mizo National Front (MNF) under the leadership of Laldenga. In 1966 the MNF started an armed campaign for independence. Thus, started a two decade long battle between Mizo insurgents and the Indian army. The MNF fought a guerilla war, got support from Pakistani government and secured shelter in the then East Pakistan. The Indian security forces countered it with a series of repressive measures of which the common people were the victims. At one point even Air Force was used. These measures caused more anger and alienation among the people. At the end of two decades of insurgency everyone was a loser. This is where maturity of the political leadership at both ends made leader of the Front; turned into a rebel after the experience of the famine in 1959; led an armed India for two and signed an Rajiv Gandhi in 1986; became the chief minister of the newly created State of Mizoram. Chon said that people in Delhi know more about the map of Europe than about the North-East in our country. I think she is right at least about my schoolmates. 128                                                                 Politics in India since Independence a difference. Laldenga came back from exile in Pakistan and started negotiations with the Indian government. Rajiv Gandhi steered these negotiations to a positive conclusion.  In 1986 a peace agreement was signed between Rajiv Gandhi and Laldenga. As per this accord Mizoram was granted full-fledged statehood  with special powers and the MNF agreed to give up secessionist struggle. Laldenga took over as the Chief Minister. This accord proved a turning point in the history of Mizoram. Today, Mizoram is one of the most peaceful places in the region and has taken big strides in literacy and development. The story of Nagaland is similar to Mizoram, except that it started much earlier and has not yet had Zapu Phizo, a section of the Nagas declared independence from India way back in 1951. Phizo turned down many offers of negotiated settlement. The Naga National Council launched an armed Nagas. After a period of violent insurgency a section of the Nagas signed an agreement with the government of India Credit: Times of India Declaration of cease fire by MNF but this was not acceptable to other rebels. The problem in Nagaland still awaits a final resolution. Movements against outsiders The large scale migration into the North-East gave rise to a special kind of problem that pitted the  local  communities against people who were seen as  outsiders  or migrants.  These latecomers, either from India or abroad are seen as encroachers on scarce resources like land and potential competitors to employment opportunities and political power. This issue has taken political and sometimes violent form in many States of the North-East. The Assam Movement from 1979 to 1985 is the best example of such movements against  outsiders.  The Assamese suspected that there were huge numbers of illegal Bengali Muslim settlers from Bangladesh. They felt that unless these foreign nationals are detected and deported they would reduce the indigenous Assamese into a minority. There were other economic issues too. There was widespread poverty and unemployment in Assam despite the existence of natural resources like oil, tea and coal. It was felt that these were drained out of the State without any commensurate benefit to the people. In 1979 the All Assam Students  Union (AASU), a students  group not affiliated to any party, led an anti-foreigner movement. The movement was against illegal migrations, against domination of Bengalis and other outsiders, and against faulty voters  register that included the names of lakhs of immigrants. The movement demanded that all outsiders who had entered the State after 1951 should be sent back. The agitation followed many novel methods and mobilised all sections of Assamese people, drawing support across the State. It also involved many tragic and violent incidents leading to loss of property and human lives. The movement also tried to blockade the movement of trains and the supply of oil from Assam to refineries in Bihar. Eventually after six years of turmoil, the Rajiv Gandhi-led government entered into negotiations with the AASU leaders, leading to the signing of an accord in 1985.  According to this agreement those foreigners who migrated into Assam during and after Bangladesh war and since, were to be identified and deported. With the successful completion of the movement, the AASU and the Asom Gana Sangram Parishad organised themselves as a regional political party called Asom Gana Parishad (AGP). It came to power in 1985 with the promise of resolving the foreign national problem as well as to build a  Golden Assam. Assam accord brought peace and changed the face of politics in Assam, but it did not solve the problem of immigration. The issue of the  outsiders  continues to be a live issue in the politics of Assam Leader of the president of Naga began an armed struggle against the Indian state; went stayed in Pakistan and spent the last three decades of his life in exile in business. It s like the Someone who got in before others treats others as 130                                                                 Politics in India since Independence and many other places in the North-East. This problem is particularly acute, for example, in Tripura as the been reduced to being a minority in their own land. The same feeling informs the hostility of the local refugees in Mizoram and To end the news, here is a look at the activities of terrorists in the four regions... Punjab, Darjeeling, Delhi, Mizoram Credit: HT book of Cartoon  Rambabu Mathur Accommodation and National Integration These  cases  have shown us that even after 75 years of independence, some of the issues of national integration are not fully resolved. We have seen that regional aspirations ranging from demands of statehood and economic development to autonomy and separation keep coming up. The period since 1980 accentuated these tensions and tested the capacity of democratic politics to accommodate the demands of diverse sections of the society.  What lessons can we draw from these examples? First and the most elementary lesson is that regional aspirations are very much a part of democratic politics. Expression of regional issues is not an aberration or an abnormal phenomenon. Even in smaller countries like the United Kingdom there are regional aspirations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Spain faces secessionist movement from the Basques and so does Sri Lanka from the Tamils. A large and diverse democracy like India must deal with regional aspirations on a regular basis. Nation building is an ongoing At the time of independence, Sikkim was a  protectorate  of India. It meant that while it was not a part of India, it was also not a fully sovereign country. Sikkim s defence and foreign relations were looked after by India, while the power of internal administration was with the Chogyal, Sikkim s monarch. This arrangement ran into difficulty as the Chogyal was unable to deal with the democratic aspirations of the people. An overwhelming majority of Sikkim s population was Nepali. But the Chogyal was seen as perpetuating the rule of a small elite from the minority Lepcha-Bhutia community. The anti-Chogyal leaders of both the communities sought and got support from the government of The first democratic elections to Sikkim assembly in 1974 were swept by Sikkim Congress which stood for greater integration with India. The assembly first sought the status of  associate state  and then in April 1975 passed a resolution asking for full integration with India. This was followed by a hurriedly organised referendum that put a stamp of popular approval on the assembly s request. The Indian Parliament accepted this request immediately and Sikkim became the 22nd State of the Indian union. Chogyal did not accept this merger and his supporters accused the government of India of foul play and use of force. Yet the merger enjoyed popular support and did not become a divisive issue in Sikkim s politics. Kazi Lhendup Dorji Leader of democracy movement in Sikkim; founder of Sikkim Praja Mandal and later leader of the Sikkim State Congress; in 1962 founded the Sikkim National Congress; after an electoral victory, he led the movement for integration of Sikkim with India; after the integration, Sikkim Congress merged with the Indian National Congress. 132                                                                 Politics in India since Independence The second lesson is that the best way to respond to regional suppression. Look at the situation in the eighties erupted in Punjab; problems were persisting in the North-East; students in Assam were agitating; Kashmir valley was on the boil. Instead of treating these as simple law and order problems, the Government of India reached negotiated settlement with regional movements. This produced a reconciliation which reduced the tensions existing in many regions. The example of Mizoram shows how political settlement can resolve the problem of separatism effectively. The third lesson is about the significance of power sharing. It is not sufficient to have a formal democratic structure. Besides that, groups and parties from the region need to be given share in power at the State level. Similarly, it is not sufficient to say that the states or the regions have autonomy in their matters. The regions together form the nation. So, the regions must have a share in deciding the destiny of the nation. If regions are not given a share in the national level decision making, the feeling of injustice and alienation can spread. The fourth lesson is that regional imbalance in economic development contributes to the feeling of regional discrimination. Regional imbalance is a fact of India s development experience. Naturally, the backward states or backward regions in some states feel that their backwardness should be addressed on priority basis and that the policies of the Indian government have caused this imbalance. If some states remain poor and others develop rapidly, it leads to regional imbalances and inter-regional Finally, these cases make us appreciate the farsightedness of the makers of our Constitution in dealing with questions of diversity. The federal system adopted by India is a flexible arrangement. While most of the states have equal powers, there are special provisions for some states like J&K and the states in the North-East. However, Article 370 that contains special provisions for J&K, was abrogated in August 2019. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution allows different tribes complete autonomy of preserving their practices and customary laws. These provisions proved crucial in resolving some very complex political problems in the North-East. What distinguishes India from many other countries that face similar challenges is that the constitutional framework in India is much more flexible and accommodative. Therefore, regional aspirations are not encouraged to espouse separatism. Thus, politics in India has succeeded in accepting regionalism as part and parcel of democratic politics. Minister of India between 1984 and 1989; son of Indira Gandhi; joined active politics after 1980; with militants in Punjab, Mizoram and the students  union in Assam; pressed for a more open economy of Sri Lankan government, to sort out the Sinhala- Although the British empire in India came to an end in 1947, Portugal refused to withdraw from the territories of Goa, Diu and Daman which were under its colonial rule since the sixteenth century. During their long rule, the Portuguese suppressed the people of Goa, denied them civil rights, and carried out forced religious conversions. After India s Independence, the Indian government tried very patiently to persuade the Portuguese government to withdraw. There was also a strong popular movement within Goa for freedom. They were strengthened by socialist satyagrahis from Maharashtra.  Finally, in December 1961, the Government of India sent the army which liberated these territories after barely two days of action. Goa, Diu and Daman became Union Territory. Another complication arose soon. Led by the Maharashtrawadi Gomanatak Party  (MGP) one section desired that Goa, as a Marathi speaking area should merge with Maharashtra. However, many Goans were keen to retain a separate Goan identity and culture, particularly the Konkani language. They were led by the United Goan Party (UGP). In January 1967, the Central Government held a special  opinion poll  in Goa asking people to decide if they wanted to be part of Maharashtra or remain separate. A referendum-like procedure was used to ascertain people s wishes on this issue. The majority voted in favour of remaining outside of Maharashtra. Thus, Goa continued as a Union Territory.  Finally, in 1987, Goa became a State of the Indian Union. Credit: R.K. Laxman in The Times of India, 21 April 1954 134                                                                 Politics in India since Independence 1.  Match the following. Nature of regional aspirations leading to statehood Linguistic identity and ii. Jharkhand /Chattisgarh tensions with Centre Regional imbalance leading to demand for Statehood Secessionist demands on iv.  Tamil Nadu account of tribal identity 2.  Regional aspirations of the people of North-East get expressed in different ways. These include movements against outsiders, movement for greater autonomy and movement for separate national existence. On the map of the North-East, using different shades for these three, show the States where these expressions are prominently 3.  What were the main provisions of the Punjab accord? In what way can they be the basis for further tensions between the Punjab and its 4.  Why did the Anandpur Sahib Resolution become controversial? 5.  Explain the internal divisions of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and describe how these lead to multiple regional aspirations in that State. 6.  What are the various positions on the issue of regional autonomy for Kashmir? Which of these do you think are justifiable? Give reasons for 7.  The Assam movement was a combination of cultural pride and economic 8.  All regional movements need not lead to separatist demands. Explain by giving examples from this chapter. 9.  Regional demands from different parts of India exemplify the principle of unity with diversity. Do you agree? Give reasons. 10.  Read the passage and answer the questions below: One of Hazarika s songs..   dwells on the unity theme; the seven states of north-eastern India become seven sisters born of the same mother..  Meghalaya went own way., Arunachal too separated 134                                                                 Politics in India since Independence and Mizoram appeared in Assam s gateway as a groom to marry another daughter...... The song ends with a determination to keep the unity of the Assamese with other smaller nationalities that are left in the present-day Assam    the Karbis and the Missing brothers and sisters are our dear ones.    S  B  Which unity is the poet talking about? Why were some States of North-East created separately out of erstwhile State of Assam? Do you think that the same theme of unity could apply to all the regions of India? Why? In this chapter  In this last chapter we take a synoptic view of the last two decades of politics in India. These developments are complex, for various kinds of factors came together to produce unanticipated outcomes in this period. The new era in politics was impossible to foresee; it is still very difficult to understand. These developments are also controversial, for these involve deep conflicts and we are still too close to the events. Yet we can ask some questions central to the political change in this period. What are the implications of the rise of coalition politics for our What is Mandalisation all about? In which ways will it change the nature of political representation? What is the legacy of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement? What does the rise of a new policy consensus do to the nature of The chapter does not answer these questions. It simply gives you the necessary information and some tools so that you can ask and answer these questions when you are through with this book. We cannot avoid asking these questions just because they are politically sensitive, for the whole point of studying the history of politics in India since Independence is to make sense of our present. Ups and downs of various political parties in the 1990s appeared to many, like this cartoon drawn in 1990, as a roller coaster ride. Riding the roller coaster are Rajiv Gandhi, V. P. Singh, L. K. Advani, Basu, N. T. Rama Rao, Devi Lal, P. K. Mahanta and K. Karunanidhi. Context of the 1990s You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi. He led the Congress to a massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections held immediately thereafter in 1984. As the decade of the eighties came to a close, the country witnessed five developments that were to make a long-lasting impact on our politics. irst the most crucial development of this period was the defeat of the Congress party in the elections held in 1989. The party that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984 was reduced to only 197 in this election. The Congress improved its performance and came back to power soon after the mid-term elections held in 1991. But the elections of 1989 marked the end of what political scientists have called the  Congress system. To be sure, the Congress remained an important party and ruled the country more than any other party even in this period since 1989. But it lost the kind of centrality it earlier enjoyed in the party system. econd development was the rise of the  Mandal issue  in national politics. This followed the decision by the new National Front government in 1990, to implement the recommendation of the Mandal Commission that jobs in central government should be reserved for the Other Backward Classes. This led to violent  anti- Mandal  protests in different parts of the country. This dispute between the supporters and opponents of OBC reservations was known as the  Mandal issue  and was to play an important role in shaping politics I wish to find out if the Congress can still bounce back to its old glory. Congress leader Sitaram Kesri withdrew the crutches of support from Deve Gowda s United Front Government. in Indian Politics 138                                                                 Politics in India since Independence hird, the economic policy followed by the various governments took a radically different turn. This is known as the initiation of the structural adjustment programme or the new economic reforms.  Started by Rajiv Gandhi, these changes first became very visible in 1991 and radically changed the direction that the Indian economy had pursued since Independence. These policies have been widely criticised by various movements and organisations. But the various governments that came to power in this period have continued to follow these. I wish to be sure if  this phenomenon would have a long-term I am not clear if this will make a difference to politics, especially if everyone has the same policy. Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in the initial phase of the  New Economic Policy. A reaction to Mandalisation. Credit: R. K. Laxman in the Times of India Recent Developments in Indian Politics ourth, the centuries old legal and political dispute over the Ram Janmabhoomi Temple in Ayodhya started influencing the politics of India which gave birth to various political changes. The Ram Janmabhoomi Temple Movement, becoming the central issue, transformed the direction of the discourse on secularism and democracy. These changes culminated in the construction of the Ram Temple at Ayodhya following the decision of the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court (which was announced on November 9, 2019). inally, the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 led to a change in leadership of the Congress party. He was assassinated by a Sri Lankan Tamil linked to the LTTE  when he was on an election campaign tour in Tamil Nadu. In the elections of 1991, Congress emerged as the single largest party. Following Rajiv Gandhi s death, the party chose Narsimha Rao as the Prime Minister. I wonder how this will affect Message of Harmony Leadership in Congress made many headlines. 1 May 1996 25 October 1995 20 August 2001 25 October 2004 140                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Era of Coalitions Elections in 1989 led to the defeat of the Congress party but did not result in a majority for any other party. Though the Congress was the largest party in the Lok Sabha, it did not have a clear majority and therefore, it decided to sit in the opposition. The National Front (which itself was an alliance of Janata Dal and some other regional parties) received support from two diametrically opposite political groups: the BJP and the Left Front. On this basis, the National Front formed a coalition government, but the BJP and the Left Front did not join in Decline of Congress over the Indian party system. Do you remember the discussion in Chapters about the restoration of the Congress system? Way back in the late sixties, the dominance of the Congress party was challenged; but the Congress under the leadership of Indira Gandhi, managed to re-establish its predominant position in politics. The nineties saw yet another challenge to the predominant position of the Congress. It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other single party to fill in lead by V. P. by the Left here by Jyoti Basu) as well as the BJP L. K. Advani) Credit: Sudhir Tailang /HT Book of Cartoons Recent Developments in Indian Politics Thus, began an era of multi-party system. To be sure, a large number of political parties always contested elections in our country. Our Parliament always had representatives from several political parties. What happened after 1989 was the emergence of several parties in such a way that one or two parties did not get most of the votes or seats. This also meant that no single party secured a clear majority of seats in any Lok Sabha election held since 1989 till 2014. This development initiated an era of coalition governments at the Centre, in which regional parties played a crucial role in forming ruling alliances but in 2014 and 2019 Lok Sabha election, the BJP got clear majority on its own. Talk to your parents about their memories of the events happening since the 1990s. Ask them what they felt were the most significant events of the period.  Sit together in groups and draw a comprehensive list of the events reported by your parents, see which events get cited most, and compare them with what the chapter suggests were the most significant. You can also discuss why some events are more important for some and not for others. that represented the Dalit and backward castes (Other Backward Classes or OBCs). Many of these parties represented powerful regional assertion as well. These parties played an important role in the United Front government that came to power in 1996. The United Front was similar to the National Front of 1989 for it included Janata Dal and several regional parties. This time the BJP did not support the government. The United Front government was supported by the Congress. This shows how unstable the political equations were. In 1989, both the Left and the BJP supported the National Front Government because they wanted to keep the Congress out of power. In 1996, the Left continued to support the non-Congress government but this time the Congress, supported it, as both the Congress and the Left wanted to keep the BJP out of power. They did not succeed for long, as the BJP continued to consolidate its position in the elections of 1991 and 1996. It emerged as the largest party in the 1996 election and was invited to form the government. But most other parties were opposed to its policies and therefore, the BJP government could not secure a majority in the Lok Sabha. It finally came to power by leading 142                                                                 Politics in India since Independence a coalition government from May 1998 to June 1999 and was re-elected in October 1999. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the Prime Minister during both these NDA governments and his government formed in 1999 completed its full term. Thus, with the elections of 1989, a long phase of coalition politics began in India.  Since then, there have been eleven governments at the Centre, all of which have either been coalition governments or minority governments supported by other parties, which did not join the government. In this new phase, any government could be formed only with the participation or support of many regional parties. This applied to the National Front in 1989, the United Front in 1996 and 1997, the BJP-led coalition in 1998, the NDA in 1999, the UPA in 2004 and 2009. trend changed in 2014. Let us connect this development with what we have learnt so far. The era of coalition governments may be seen as a long-term trend resulting from relatively silent changes that were taking place over the last few decades. We saw in chapter two that in earlier times, it was the Congress party itself that was a  coalition  of different interests and different social strata and groups.  This gave rise to the term  Congress system. A cartoonist s depiction of the change from one-party dominance to a multi-party Credit: Ajit Ninan/India Today Recent Developments in Indian Politics CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS SINCE 1989 Note: The blank space is for you to record more information on the major policies, performance and controversies about that government. For more details about the current and former Prime Ministers, visit 144                                                                 Politics in India since Independence We also saw in Chapters that, especially since the late 1960s, various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming separate political parties of their own. We also noted the rise of many regional parties in the period after 1977.  While these developments weakened the Congress party, they did not enable any single party to replace the Congress. are the logic of democratic politics in our kind of society. Does that mean that we will always have coalitions? Or can the national parties it is a single party or coalition government. I am more worried about what they do. Does a we not have bold and in a coalition? Political Rise of Other Backward Classes One long-term development of this period was the rise of Other Backward Classes as a political force. You have already come across this term  OBC. This refers to the administrative category  Other Backward Classes. These are communities other than SC and ST who suffer from educational and social backwardness. These are also referred to as  backward castes. We have already noted in Chapter Six that the support for the Congress among many sections of the  backward castes  had declined. This created a space for non-Congress parties that drew more support from these communities. You would recall that the rise of these parties first found political expression at the national level in the form of the Janata Party government in 1977. Many of the constituents of the Janata Party, like the Bharatiya Kranti Dal and the Samyukta Socialist Party, had a powerful rural base among some sections of the OBC. In the 1980s, the Janata Dal brought together a similar combination of political groups with strong support among the OBCs. The decision of the National Front government to implement the recommendations Recent Developments in Indian Politics of the Mandal Commission further helped in shaping the politics of  Other Backward Classes. The intense national debate for and against reservation in jobs made people from the OBC communities more aware of this identity. Thus, it helped those who wanted to mobilise these groups in politics. This period saw the emergence of many parties that sought better opportunities for OBCs in education and employment and also raised the question of the share of power enjoyed by the OBCs. These parties claimed that since OBCs constituted a large segment of Indian society, it was only democratic that the OBCs should get adequate representation in administration and have their due share of political power. Implementation of Mandal Commission report sparked off agitations and political upheavals. 146                                                                 Politics in India since Independence The Mandal Commission Reservations for the OBC were in existence in southern States since the 1960s, if not earlier. But this policy was not operative in north Indian States. It was during the tenure of Janata Party government in 1977-79 that the demand for reservations for backward castes in north India and at the national level was strongly raised. Karpoori Thakur, the then Chief Minister of Bihar, was a pioneer in this direction. His government had introduced a new policy of reservations for OBCs in Bihar. Following this, the central government appointed  a Commission in 1978 to look into and recommend ways to improve the conditions of the backward classes. This was the second time since Independence that the government had appointed such a commission. Therefore, this commission was officially known as the Second Backward Classes Commission. Popularly, the commission is known as the Mandal Commission, after the name of its Chairperson, Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal. investigate the extent of educational and social backwardness among various sections of Indian society and recommend ways of identifying these  backward classes.  It was also expected to give its recommendations on the ways in which this backwardness could be ended.  The Commission government had fallen. The Commission advised that  backward classes  should be understood to mean  backward castes, since many castes, other than the Scheduled Castes, were also treated as low in the caste hierarchy. The Commission did a survey and found that these backward castes had a very low presence in both educational institutions and in employment in public services. It therefore recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in educational institutions and government jobs for these groups. The Mandal Commission also made many other recommendations, like, land reform, to improve the conditions of the OBCs. In August 1990, the National Front government decided to implement one of the recommendations of Mandal Commission pertaining to reservations for OBCs in jobs in the central government and its undertakings. This decision sparked agitations and violent protests in many cities of north India. The decision was also challenged in the Supreme Court and came to be known as the  Indira Sawhney case, after the name of one of the petitioners. In November 1992, the Supreme Court gave a ruling upholding the decision of the government.  There were some differences among political parties about the manner of implementation of this decision. But now the policy of reservation for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country. (1918-1982): M.P. from Bihar for 1967-1970 and 1977-1979; chaired the Second Backward reservations for Other Backward Classes; a socialist leader from Bihar; Chief Minister of Bihar for just a month and a half in 1968; joined the Janata Party in 1977. Recent Developments in Indian Politics The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the Dalits. In 1978 the Backward and Minority Communities Employees Federation (BAMCEF) was formed. This organisation was not an ordinary trade union of government employees. It took a strong position in favour of political power to the  bahujan    the SC, ST, OBC and minorities. It was out of this that the subsequent Dalit Shoshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti and later the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) emerged under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. The BSP began as a small party supported largely by Dalit voters in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But in 1989 and the 1991 elections, it achieved a breakthrough in Uttar Pradesh. This was the first time in independent India that a political party supported mainly by Dalit voters had achieved this kind of In fact, the BSP, under Kanshi Ram s leadership was envisaged as an organisation based on pragmatic politics. It derived confidence from the fact that the Bahujans (SC, ST, OBC and religious minorities)  constituted the majority of the population, and were a formidable political force on the strength of their numbers.  Since then the BSP has emerged as a major political player in the State and has been in government on more than one occasion. Its strongest support still comes from Dalit voters, but it has expanded its support now to various other social groups. In many parts of India, Dalit politics and OBC politics have developed independently and often in competition with each other. founder of Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP); left his central government job for social and political work; founder of and finally the BSP in 1984; power as master key to attaining credited with Dalit resurgence in north leaders of all the backward and Dalit communities? Or will the gains be monopolised by some powerful castes and families within these groups? The real point is not the leaders but the people! Will this lead to better policies and effective implementation for the really deprived people? Or will it remain just a political game? 148                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Communalism, Secularism, Democracy The other long-term development during this period was the visible rise of politics based on religious identity leading to a debate about secularism and democracy. We noted in Chapter Six that in the aftermath of the Emergency, the Bharatiya Jana Sangh had merged with the Janata Party. After the fall of the Janata Party and its break-up, the supporters of erstwhile Jana Sangh formed the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in 1980. Initially, the BJP adopted a broader political platform than that of the Jana Sangh. BJP embraced  Gandhian  Socialism  along with cultural nationalism as its ideology. But it did not get much success in the elections held in 1984. After 1986, the party began to emphasise nationalism as the core of its ideology. The BJP also pursued the politics of  Hindutva  for political mobilisation. Hindutva was popularised by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, as the basis of Indian nationhood. It basically meant that to be an Indian, one must accept India as their  fatherland  (pitrubhu) as well as their holy land (punyabhu). Believers of  Hindutva  argue that a strong nation can be built on the basis of a united national culture. They also believe that in the case of India, Hindutva can provide this base. Two developments around 1986 became central to the politics of BJP. The first was the Shah Bano case in 1985. In this case a 62- year old divorced Muslim woman, had filed a case for maintenance from her former husband. The Supreme Court ruled in favour of Shah Bano. The orthodox Muslims saw the Supreme Court s order as an interference in Muslim Personal Law. On the demand of some Muslim leaders, the government passed the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 that nullified the Supreme Court s judgement. This action of the government was opposed by many women s organisations, many Muslim groups and most of the intellectuals. The BJP criticised this action of the Congress government as an unnecessary concession and  appeasement  of the The Ayodhya issue, as the second significant development, was deeply rooted in socio- cultural and political history of the country pertaining to different perspectives from various stakeholders. It involved contentions regarding the birth place of Shri Ram, one of the most holy religious sites, and its legal ownership. The significance of Ayodhya Ram Janmabhoomi site can be judged by the fact that the 500-year long history, starting from 1528, is marked by numerous conflicts which are also documented in Lucknow, Barabanki and Faizabad district Gazetteers. A three-dome Do you know? There is a very dated November 28 1858, when Nihang site and performed Puja and Havan, before being forcibly ousted by colonial Recent Developments in Indian Politics structure was built at the site of Shri Ram s birth place in 1528, but the structure had visible display of Hindu symbols and relics in its interior as well as its exterior portions. Therefore, Ayodhya Ram Janmabhoomi issue got linked to the national pride in its ancient civilization. Over the years, this issue evolved into a prolonged legal battle, leading to the structure being sealed in 1949 due to the onset of court proceedings. In 1986, the situation regarding the three-dome structure took a significant turn when the Faizabad (now Ayodhya) district court ruled to unlock the structure, allowing people to worship there. The dispute had been going on for many decades as it was believed that the three- dome structure was built at Shri Ram s birthplace after demolition of a temple. However, although Shilaanyas for the temple was done, further construction remained prohibited. The Hindu community felt that their concerns related to the birth place of Shri Ram were overlooked, while the Muslim community sought assurance of their possession over the structure. Subsequently, tensions heightened between both communities over ownership rights, resulting in numerous disputes and legal conflicts. Both communities desired a fair resolution to the longstanding issue. In 1992, following the demolition of the structure, some critics contended that it presented a substantial challenge to the principles of Indian democracy. From Legal Proceedings to Amicable Acceptance It is important to note that in any society conflicts are bound to take place. However, in a multi -religious and multi-cultural democratic society, these conflicts are usually resolved following the due process of law. Through a number of democratic and legal procedures including court hearings, mediation attempts, popular movements, and finally with a 5-0 verdict of a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court on November 9, 2019, the Ayodhya issue was resolved. This verdict sought to reconcile the conflicting interests of the various stakeholders involved in the dispute. The verdict allotted the disputed site to the Shri Ram Janmabhoomi Teertha Kshetra Trust for the construction of Ram temple and directed the concerned government to allot appropriate site for the construction of a Mosque to the Sunni Central Waqf Board. In this way, democracy gives room for conflict resolution in a plural society like ours, upholding the inclusive spirit of the Constitution. This issue was resolved following the due process of law based on evidences such as archaeological excavations and historical records. The Supreme Court s decision was celebrated by the society at large. It is a classic example of consensus building on a sensitive issue that shows the maturity of democratic ethos which are civilizationally ingrained in India. 150                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Emergence of a new consensus The period after 1989 is seen sometimes as the period of decline of Congress and rise of BJP. If you want to understand the complex nature of political competition in this period, you have to compare the electoral performances of the Congress and the BJP....At the heart of the Constitution is a commitment to equality upheld and enforced by the rule of law. Under our Constitution, citizens of all faiths, beliefs and creeds seeking divine provenance are both subject to the law and equal before the law. Every judge of this Court is not merely tasked with but sworn to uphold the Constitution and its values. The Constitution does not make a distinction between the faith and belief of one religion and another. All forms of belief, worship and prayer are equal...  (For details see, Supreme Court Judgments, November 9, 2019, p. 920, https://main.sci.gov.in/ supremecourt/2010/36350/36350_2010_1_1502_18205_Judgement_09-Nov-2019.pdf)  It is thus concluded   that faith and belief of Hindus since prior to construction of Mosque and subsequent thereto has always been that Janmaasthan of Lord Ram is the place where Babri Mosque has been constructed which faith and belief is proved by documentary and oral evidence discussed above.  (For details see, Supreme Court Judgments, November 9, 2019, p. 1045, https://main.sci.gov.in/ supremecourt/2010/36350/36350_2010_1_1502_18205_Judgement_09-Nov-2019.pdf) The excerpts referring to the Judgment of the constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court Party Position (Number of seats won) in Lok Sabha Recent Developments in Indian Politics Now let us try to understand the meaning of the information given in You will notice that BJP and Congress were engaged in a tough competition in this period. What is the difference between their electoral fortunes if you compare these with the 1984 elections?.  You will notice that since the 1989 election, the votes polled by the two parties, Congress and the BJP, most of the time, add up to more than fifty per cent except in 1996, 2004 and 2009. Look at both the charts showing Congress and Janata  family  of parties. Which among the parties that exist today are neither part of Congress family of parties nor part of Janata family of parties? The political competition during the nineties is divided between the coalition led by BJP and the coalition led by the Congress. Can you list the parties that are not part of any of these two coalitions? Lok Sabha Elections (2004-2019) In the elections of 2004, the Congress party too entered into coalitions in a big way. The National Democratic Alliance (NDA) was defeated and a new coalition government led by the Congress, known as the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) came to power. This government received support from the Left Front parties. The elections of 2004 also witnessed the partial revival of Congress party. It could increase per cent of vote share 152                                                                 Politics in India since Independence its seats once again after 1991. However, in the 2004 elections, there was a negligible difference between the votes polled by the Congress and its allies and the BJP and its allies. The Congress led UPA government completed its term despite Left parties withdrawing the support in July 2008 on the issue of Indo- US nuclear deal. Elections for 15th Lok Sabha were held in 2009. Results witnessed a rise in the number of seats (from 145 in 2004 to 206 in 2009) of the Indian National Congress (INC) and Congress led UPA Government. Dr. Manmohan Singh was sworn as Prime Minister for the second term, heading the coalition government of UPA again. Bhartiya Janata Party declared Narendra Modi (then the Chief Minister of Gujrat) as its Prime Ministerial candidate in September 2013. BJP under the leadership of Narendra Modi got a clear majority in 16th Lok Sabha elections held in 2014. BJP won 282 seats on its own, becoming the first party to gain single party majority after 30 years. Despite single-party majority of its own, BJP did choose to form the NDA government with its coalition partners. Year 2014 was a proverbial watershed moment of Indian politics. Narendra Modi led NDA government rapidly took decisions in social sector, foreign policy and economic policy. The BJP again emerged victorious with 303 seats of its own in 2019 Lok Sabha election. Even when BJP is getting full majority, the recognition of coalition politics is still relevant. Thus, the party system has now changed almost dramatically from what it was till However, on many crucial issues, a broad agreement has emerged among most parties. In the midst of severe competition and many conflicts, a consensus appears to have emerged among most parties. This consensus consists of four elements. irst, agreement on new economic policies   while many groups are opposed to the new economic policies,  most political parties are in support of the  new economic policies. Most parties believe that these policies would lead the country to prosperity and a status of economic power in the world. econd,  acceptance of the political and social claims of the backward castes   political parties have recognised that the social and political claims of the backward castes need to be accepted. As a result, all political parties now support reservation of seats for the  backward classes  in education and employment. Recent Developments in Indian Politics Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic depiction of India s external boundaries. 154                                                                 Politics in India since Independence As you know around the time of India s independence, many other countries also became independent and adopted democracy. However, even India emerged as a mature democracy playing a great role in promoting social equality and   national development, the same has not been the case in some of those countries. Discuss amongst yourselves the factors that have enabled democracy to thrive in India. Political parties are also willing to ensure that the OBCs get adequate share of power. hird, acceptance of the role of State level parties in governance of the country   the distinction between State level and national level parties is fast becoming less important. As we saw in this chapter, State level parties are sharing power at the national level and have played a central role in the country s politics of last twenty years or so. ourth, emphasis on pragmatic considerations rather than ideological positions and political alliances without ideological agreement   coalition politics has shifted the focus of political parties from ideological differences to power sharing arrangements. Thus, most parties of the NDA did not agree with the  Hindutva  ideology of the BJP. Yet, they came together to form a government and remained in power for a full term. All these are momentous changes and are going to shape politics in the near future. We started this study of politics in India with the discussion of how the Congress emerged as a dominant party. From that situation, we have now arrived at a more competitive politics, but politics that is based on a certain implicit agreement among the main political actors. Thus, even as political parties act within the sphere of this consensus, popular movements and organisations are simultaneously identifying new forms, visions and pathways of development. Issues like poverty, displacement, minimum wages, livelihood and social security are being put on the political agenda by peoples  movements, reminding the state of its responsibility. Similarly, issues of justice and democracy are being voiced by the people in terms of class, caste, gender and regions.  We cannot predict the future of democracy. All we know is that democratic politics is here to stay in India and that it will unfold through a continuous churning of some of the factors mentioned in this chapter. Recent Developments in Indian Politics Party Position in 17th Lok Sabha Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) Shiv Sena (SS) Janata Dal United (JD-U) Biju Janata Dal (BJD) Indian National Congress (INC) Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Indian National Congress (INC) Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) Shiv Sena (SS) Janata Dal (United) [JD(U)] Biju Janata Dal (BJD) Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) 156                                                                 Politics in India since Independence 1. 	 Unscramble a bunch of disarranged press clipping file of Unni-Munni  and arrange the file chronologically. Implementation of the recommendation of the Mandal Commission Formation of the Janata Dal Supreme court Judgment on the Ram Janmabhoomi Assassination of Indira Gandhi The formation of NDA government Formation of the UPA government 2. 	 Match the following. (a)	 Politics of Consensus i. 	 Shah Bano case (b)	 Caste based parties ii. 	 Rise of OBCs (c)	 Personal Law and iii. 	 Coalition government iv. 	 Agreement on Economic (d)	 Growing strength of 3. 	 State the main issues in Indian politics in the period after 1989. What different configurations of political parties these differences lead to? 4. 	  In the new era of coalition politics, political parties are not aligning or re- aligning on the basis of ideology.  What arguments would you put forward to support or oppose this statement? 5.  Trace the emergence of BJP as a significant force in post-Emergency 6. 	 In spite of the decline of Congress dominance, the Congress party continues to influence politics in the country. Do you agree? Give reasons. 7. 	 Many people think that a two-party system is required for successful democracy. Drawing from India s experience of last 30 years, write an essay on what advantages the present party system in India has. 8.  	Read the passage and answer the questions below: Party politics in India has confronted numerous challenges. Not only has the Congress system destroyed itself, but the fragmentation of  the Congress coalition has triggered a new emphasis on self-representation which raises questions about the party system and its capacity to accommodate diverse interests,.. An important test facing the polity is to evolve a party system or political parties that can effectively articulate and aggregate a variety of interests.   Zoya Hasan Write a short note on what the author calls challenges of the party system in the light of what you have read in this chapter. Given an example from this chapter of the lack of accommodation and aggregation mentioned in this passage. Why is it necessary for parties to accommodate and aggregate variety of interests? 156                                                                 Politics in India since Independence Recent Developments in Indian Politics LET US DO IT TOGETHER This chapter covers the major developments in Indian politics until the 2004 Elections (14th Lok Sabha). Subsequently, the Lok Sabha elections were held in 2009, during which the UPA led by the Congress won. In the 2014 and 2019 Elections, the NDA led by the BJP emerged victorious. The position of various parties in the 17th Lok Sabha is given A detailed study of Members of the 17th Lok Sabha is available on the website of the Lok Sabha (http://loksabha.nic.in). Compare and contrast the electoral performances of various political parties since 2004. The table given below can be used for this. You can also collect the data about the results from the website of the Election Commission of India (http://eci.nic.in). Prepare a timeline of the major political events in India since 2004. Share and discuss it in your classroom. Party Positions in Indian Parliament since 2004 Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Biju Janata Dal (BJD) Communist Party of India   Marxist (CPI-M) Communist Party of India (CPI) Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) Indian National Congress(INC) Janata Dal - United (JD -U) Janata Dal -Secular (JD - S) Lok Jan Shakti Party (LJSP) Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD) Samajwadi Party (SP) Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) Shiv Sena (SS) Total Seats in Indian Parliament: 543 (530 from States and 13 from UTs) Recent Developments in Indian Politics Source: Election Commission of India


=== Class6_Polity ===

10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Grassroots Democracy   Part 1  r j nam dharmagopt ram dharmo rak hati rak hitah   The ruler protects dharma and dharma protects those who protect it.   There is no peace without justice; no justice without equality; no equality without development; no democracy without respect to the identity and dignity of cultures and peoples.  Rigoberta Mench  Tum What is the meaning of Why do we need a government? What is the meaning of  democracy ? Why is it Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Human beings have been living in communities for a long time. When a large number of people live together, there can be disagreements and disorder, and rules become necessary to maintain order and harmony in the society. There are probably some simple rules at home that you are expected to follow. The school where you study has rules too   some for students, others for teachers. In higher classes, students appearing for examinations must follow certain rules. Drivers on the road are expected to obey traffic rules. People employed in all kinds of jobs also need to follow the rules set by their employer, while the employers must also follow rules which they have committed to their employees. What would happen if no one followed those rules? A simple answer is that society would not be able to function. what differences do you see between them? How do you connect this with our discussion on rules? What are some of the rules in your school? Who made Who makes the rules and why? How are they made? These are some of the questions we will explore in this chapter. The process of taking decisions, organising the society s life with different sets of rules, and ensuring that they are followed, is called governance. The group of individuals or the system that makes the rules and ensures that they are followed is called a government. Some of the more important rules are called laws. This does not mean that rules and laws are set once and for all. Just as you might discuss a particular rule at home with your parents, or as a student body might ask the school or 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 university management to change a rule, citizens also have a say in the laws and rules governing the society. We will see how this takes place. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Can you identify the categories of public service or other activities that are represented in the ten pictures in Fig. 10.2 What role do you think the government plays in each of Can you think of other aspects of your daily life where the government plays an important role? Three Organs of Government All over the world, digital technologies have been transforming the way societies function. In India, till about 30 years ago, people who wanted to transfer money to a distant relative would have to queue up at the Post Office to send a money order after filling up a form; or if they had to send a payment to some business, they would queue up at their bank to obtain a demand draft, which would then have to be sent by post. You have probably never heard these terms ( money order  or  demand draft ), because today we have digital means of sending across money instantly! However, this has also created a new class of criminals who, without even leaving their desks, find digital ways of stealing people s money. This has led many governments to pass new laws in order to fight such criminal activities (called  cybercrime ). Some of those criminals, who believe in robbing innocent people of their hard-earned money instead of using their skills to contribute to the society, have been arrested and convicted in court. They are usually fined as well as jailed for some years. Through this example, we can see how the three branches or  organs  of a government work together: The legislature is the organ that makes new laws (or  legislates ). Sometimes it also updates or removes Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy existing laws. This is done by an assembly of represen- tatives of the people. We will soon see how the Indian The executive is the organ that implements (or  executes ) the laws. This includes the head of state (who may be a president, a prime minister or a chief minister), the ministers and any agency responsible for enforcing  law and order. (In our example above, that agency is the cyber police.) The judiciary is the system of courts which decides whether someone has broken the law and, if so, what course of action should be taken, including punishment if necessary. Sometimes it also examines whether a decision taken by the executive is right, or whether a law passed by the legislature is well conceived and fair Explain how the three government organs are at work in the case of the cybercriminals described above. How do they In a good system of governance, these three organs must be kept separate, although they interact with each other and work together. This separation is called the  separation of powers  (Fig. 10.3). It is intended to provide a system of checks and balances. This means that each organ of the government can check what the other is doing and restore balance if one organ acts beyond its expected role. 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 As a class activity, can you imagine the sort of disorder we might witness if all three organs were under the control of the same group of people? Can you describe any such real-life situation you may have heard of? Three Levels of Government Any government operates at two levels at the least   local and national. In many countries, including India, it functions at three levels or tiers   local, state or regional, and national. Each level deals with different matters. To use a comparison, if a bulb in your home is not lighting up, you will first check the bulb, switch, fuse, etc. If that does not work, you may call an electrician, and if it is found that the problem is not within your home, you may need to go to the Electricity Board and file a complaint. These are also three levels of dealing with a problem. at the town or Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy In India, we have local governments, State governments, Imagine that following heavy rain for a few days, there is a flood in a part of a district. If it is not too severe, the local authorities may be able to deal with it. If it involves several towns and many villages, the State Government will step in and send rescue teams to help affected people. But if it s a massive flood affecting vast areas, the Central Government may also come to help by sending relief supplies, the army, etc. These are the three levels again. DON T MISS OUT Many of our institutions have mottos inspired by the wisdom of our ancient texts. The Government of India s motto, for example, is Satyameva Jayate, which means  Truth alone triumphs. The Supreme Court s motto is Yato Dharmastato Jayah, or,  Where there is dharma, there is victory.  The table on the facing page provides in summary a general framework of the main functions of the government s three organs at the national and State levels. Their details (including the precise role of the assemblies) will be studied in greater depth in Grade 7. (Local government is not mentioned here as we will look at it more closely in the next two chapters.) Observe the table (Fig. 10.5). Highlight the functions and responsibilities that affect your life the most. Ask two or three adults about their connection or interaction with the government     at what levels does it take place and for what purpose? 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 It means, in our case, that of India and of a State are not the actual the affairs of where laws are Two houses     Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha    formulate national laws One State Assembly or Vidhan Sabha (Note that most States have a single assembly; a few States have two) Led by the President of India (nominal head and Supreme Commander of the Indian Armed Forces), Prime Minister as the Led by the Governor Chief Minister as the (the list is not Police, law and of laws made by the Central government at the Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Born in a humble family in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, in 1931, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam was a renowned scientist, nicknamed the  Missile Man of India  for his crucial role in the development of India s space programme, missile programme and nuclear capabilities. Dr. Abdul Kalam served as the 11th President of India from 2002 to 2007. Despite his high status, he remained deeply connected to the people, and the youth in particular, through his passion for good education and innovation. He inspired millions with his humility, dedication to social causes and commitment to the nation. He tirelessly encouraged young Indians to dream big and work hard to achieve their goals. Dr. Kalam showed that even though his position as the President of India was nominal, he could play an important role, impacting Let us meditate on a few of his inspiring thoughts:  Look at the sky. We are not alone. The whole universe is friendly to us and conspires only to give the best to those who dream and work.   To succeed in your mission, you must devotion to your goal.   If you fail, never give up because F.A.I.L. means  First Attempt In Learning. End is not the end, in fact E.N.D. means  Effort Never Dies. If you get  no  as an answer, remember N.O. means  Next Opportunity. So let s be positive.   Dream is not that which you see while sleeping; it is something that does not let you sleep.   If four things are followed   having a great aim, acquiring knowledge, hard work, and perseverance   then anything can be achieved.  Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 You may have noticed that we earlier mentioned  representatives of the people. This is one of the foundation of the world   democracy. The word  democracy  comes from two Greek words   d mos meaning  people, and kratos meaning  rule  or  power; so  democracy  literally means the  rule of the people. But can all people actually rule? It is clearly not possible. Imagine there is a problem that your class wants to bring to the attention of your school s principal   maybe there is something wrong with the classroom, or with the school s infrastructure, or perhaps you would like to propose a certain date for a field trip. Will the entire class go to the principal? It would clearly not be practical. In many schools, classes have a  class monitor  or  class representative, whom the whole class elected; even if there is none, one representative can be selected for this specific purpose. It will be enough to send the representative to the principal. It is the same principle at the State or national levels   through elections, people vote for representatives, who will be the elected members of their respective assemblies. They are generally called  Members of Legislative Assembly  (or MLAs) at the State level, and  Member of Parliament  (or MPs) at the national level. All these members discuss laws, problems and solutions in the assemblies, and, through dialogue and debate, try to convince each other whenever there are different therefore, India is a representative democracy. It is also the world s Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy largest democracy, with some 970 million voters in 2024! In principle, all Indian citizens above the age of 18 have the right to participate in these elections. Imagine that your class is planning to go for a picnic. There are two possible places, A and B. The class discusses the pros and cons   distance, time, cost, availability of basic facilities, etc. It becomes difficult to arrive at a decision. So your teacher decides that voting can solve the problem. The number of students in favour of place A raise their hands, then the number of students in favour of place B raise theirs. The decision is taken by whichever option gets a larger number of raised hands. (This process is called voting.) This is a case of direct democracy where every student s opinion was taken to finalise the place. The term grassroots democracy refers to a system that enables and encourages the participation of ordinary citizens   the base of the pyramid we saw in Fig. 10.4 on decisions which affect them. We will study more features of Indian democracy in the next two chapters and also in later grades. Before we move on... No country can run without governance and government. A modern government has three organs   legislative, executive and judiciary   which need to work together. The Indian government functions at three levels   Centre or national, State and local. Democracy is the overall framework for this system. It functions through elected representatives, both at the State and the national levels. 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Questions, activities and projects Test yourself   What is the meaning of democracy? What is the difference between direct democracy and Recall the three organs of government. What are their Why do we need three tiers of government? Project: Many of you will remember the lockdown that took place during the COVID-19 pandemic. Make a list of all the actions that were taken at that time? Which tiers of government were involved in managing the situation? What was the role of each of the organs of government? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Local Government in The real India lives in its villages.   M.K. Gandhi Let us now see how the government functions at the local level. In this chapter, our focus will be on local government in rural areas; we will move to urban areas in the next chapter. India is a country of enormous size and diversity. We have about 600,000 villages, 8,000 towns and over 4,000 cities. Our population has crossed 1.4 billion, almost two-thirds of which live in rural areas. How do we govern ourselves in this Let us take a trip to Lakshmanpur, a small village in the foothills of the Himalayas. It has 200 houses and a population of about 700, most of whom are farmers. People cultivate What are Panchayati Raj What are their functions? Why are they important in governance and democracy? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy their lands and rear cows or goats. Some have relatives serving in the armed forces; a few younger villagers have migrated to the city in search of jobs. What are the needs of this village   maybe water for the fields, repairing the main road if it got damaged by heavy rains, or maintaining the village s primary school? How will the villagers take decisions about such matters that affect their daily lives? And where will they get the resources to meet those needs? What will happen if there is a dispute about land or if some of the crop is stolen? Many such questions can arise in a village. Can people run to the State or the national capital for every such issue? Panchayati Raj System Like every village in India, the Lakshmanpur people have a system of local government called  Panchayat, which refers to a village council. Panchayats bring governance closer to the people, making it possible for them to actively participate in decision-making processes. That is why the Panchayat system, also known as Panchayati Raj, is a form of self-government. Panchayats play a vital role in addressing local issues, promoting development and ensuring that the benefits of government schemes reach the grassroots level. Village Parishad / Block Panchayat / Panchayat Samiti / 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 As is clear from the diagram, the Panchayati Raj system works at three levels   from bottom up   the village, the block and the district. This is called a  three-tier system. Together, these institutions  responsibilities cover almost all aspects of life in the district, from agriculture, housing, maintenance of roads, management of water resources, education, health care and social welfare to cultural Panchayat, which is closest to the people in rural areas. Its members are elected directly by the Gram Sabha, which is a group of adults from a village (or group of neighbouring villages) who are enrolled as voters. In the Gram Sabha, women and men discuss all matters related to their area and take decisions. Each Gram Panchayat elects a head or president called the  Sarpanch  or  Pradhan. In recent years, more and more women have become Sarpanchs. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Dnyaneshwar Kamble is a transgender person who was elected Sarpanch of Tarangfal village in the Solapur district of Maharashtra in 2017. Kamble s motto is lok seva, gram seva, that is,  Service to the village is service to the public.  Kamble defeated six other candidates to become the Sarpanch. in Madhya Pradesh, defied patriarchal norms to become the first female Sarpanch of her village. She convinced women in the village to attend the Sabha meetings and addressed critical issues like education and sanitation, Vandana s journey shows how women can play a leading role  in transforming Hiware Bazar, a village in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra, used to be affected by frequent droughts and poor agricultural yield. After Popatrao Baguji Pawar became its Sarpanch, he started applying Anna Hazare s model of rainwater harvesting, watershed conservation and massive tree planting of lakhs of trees, all of which contributed to the recharge of groundwater. With the collaboration of the villagers, Hiware Bazar became a green and prosperous village in a few years. Shri Popatrao Pawar was awarded the Padma Shri in 2020. 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 The Gram Panchayat is assisted by a Panchayat Secretary who performs administrative functions such as calling meetings and maintaining records. Most Gram Panchayats are also assisted by an officer called  Patwari  in many parts of India, who maintains the villagers  land records. In some cases, the Patwari keeps maps that are generations old! THINK ABOUT IT How do you think can these old maps be helpful for us? Can they tell us something about the past and the present? Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative Panchayats are supposed to listen to everyone s voice   including the voice of children. The Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative creates opportunities for children to express their ideas and opinions on matters that concern their wellbeing. Steps are being taken in several States to encourage the participation of children in Bal Sabhas and Bal Panchayats on a regular basis, while village elders try to find solutions to their concerns. In Maharashtra, for example, a few Bal Panchayats have worked to eliminate child labour and child marriage. They have brought many children back to school. The Bal Panchayat members get together to convince parents and other adults to send their wards back to school, and not to arrange marriages for girls who should be studying. Several Gram Panchayats have won awards for taking child-friendly initiatives. Here s an example from Sikkim: Sangkhu Radhu Khandu Gram Panchayat, in west Sikkim, has given a lot of importance to children s needs and rights. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy The Panchayat has built compound walls for schools to make them safer for children. To ensure that students get hygienically cooked midday meals, the Gram Panchayat has constructed kitchens in the schools. It is for these efforts that Sangkhu Radhu Khandu has been declared a child- friendly Gram Panchayat. Let us also look at another example from Rajasthan: The  Children s Parliament, an offshoot of Bunker Roy s  Barefoot College  initiative a few decades ago, empowered underprivileged children in Rajasthan s rural areas through education and democratic participation. Children aged 8 to 14 are engaged in governance processes, learning about democracy and social responsibility through night schools and parliament-like elections. The  Parliament  followed formal procedures, including voter ID cards and campaigning. Elected representatives formed a  Cabinet, overseeing school management and advocating for community needs. The initiative fostered leadership skills and social awareness, enabling children to challenge societal norms and advocate for change. Children actively addressed issues such as access to education, sanitation and 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Children s Parliament initiative received many accolades, including the World s Children s Honorary Award in 2001. As a class activity, let four or five students form a Bal Panchayat and the rest of the class imagine they are the villagers. What issues will the Gram Sabha discuss? What challenges could it encounter? What solutions will it propose? Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad Similar institutions exist at the block level and the district level, which are above the village level. Their names are listed in the pyramidal diagram we saw in Fig. 11.1 on page 164. The Panchayat Samiti at the block level is the link between the Gram Panchayat and the Zila Parishad at the district level. The members of these institutions are elected by the local people, but they may have other members like Sarpanchs of the villages in the area and local members of the State Legislative Assembly. The composition of the Panchayat Samitis differs from State to State, but their role in strengthening the participation of local people remains the same. They coordinate matters across Gram Panchayats, for instance, by collecting development plans from all Gram Panchayats and putting them together to present them at the District or State levels respectively. This facilitates the allotment of funds for such development projects and for government schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, which promotes the construction of all-weather roads in rural areas. At all the three levels, special rules have been made so that disadvantaged sections of the population can make their needs and problems heard. These institutions also have a provision for reserving one-third of the seats for women. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think it is important for the government to pay more attention to the needs and problems of the disadvantaged sections of society? What similarities and differences do you notice between the governance system at the Central level and at the Panchayat level? (Hint: refer back to Chapter 10 if required.) If you get an opportunity to meet a few Panchayat members, what questions would you like to ask them? Discuss in small groups to create a questionnaire. Meet some Gram Panchayat members or invite them to your school. Ask them the questions in your questionnaire and write a short report. Let us remember that the structure and functions of the Panchayati Raj institutions differ a little across States. This is because the States have authority over those institutions. But their objectives are the same   it is to enable villagers to take an active part in the management and development of their villages and the local area. The Artha h stra is an ancient text of governance written by Kau ilya (later also known as Ch akya) some 2,300 years ago. Among other things, it describes how a state should be structured and run, how the economy can be made prosperous, what the duties of the ruler are and how to conduct war. Kau ilya, an expert in statecraft, also explains how a whole administrative structure should be put in place from the village to the regional capital: 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2  The king shall establish a sangraha a (a sub-district head quarters) for every 10 villages; a k rva ika (district headquarters) for every 100 villages; a dro amukha for every 400 villages; and a sth n ya (provincial headquarters) for every 800 villages.  In today s language, what are the names we would give these four categories? Is it not amazing that a similar structure was thought of so long ago? Before we move on... The local government in rural areas is organised into a Democracy in the Panchayati Raj system works both through direct participation of people and through their The Panchayati Raj institutions give people in rural areas a measure of self-governance, so they may manage their issues and collaborate in development plans. Questions, activities and projects Test yourself   without looking at the text above, can you name the three tiers of the Panchayati Raj system? What are the key functions of each of the three tiers? Write a letter to the Sarpanch regarding the issue of plastic bags lying on the roadside in the village. In your view, what type of person should be a Gram Let us suppose that you study in a village school. The school is located next to a highway and students find it difficult to cross the road when they come to school or leave at the end of the day. What are the options to solve this issue? Which institutions in the Panchayati Raj can help you? What can the students do? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Local Government in I desire that   a full-fledged local body should be immediately formed,   so that people may know really what is an administration, what are the franchise, what are the powers, what are the rights and what are the privileges in a small sphere, in their own town, in their own villages. What are urban local bodies and what are their functions? Why are they important in governance and democracy? Fig. 12.1. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (originally  Bombay Municipal Corporation ) was created in 1865.   Rustom K. Sidhwa, Member, Constituent Assembly (during the Constituent Assembly Debates, 13 October 1949) Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Earlier chapters have shown us how, in a democracy, good governance aims to empower the citizens so they may actively participate in their country s functioning, whether it is at the rural, regional, urban, state or national level. This is the broader concept of participatory democracy. We saw the basics of the system in a rural context. Let us now see how it works in an urban scenario. Since the latter is generally more complex and diverse than the former, it is understandable that the urban governance system needs to be more complex too. We will however limit ourselves here to its basic principles. Why is a city like Kolkata, Chennai or Mumbai more complex and diverse than a village or a town? With your classmates, make a list of diverse communities residing in any city that you are familiar with. How many were you able to list? What else do you observe in the list? Before we explore governance and administration in urban areas, it helps to take an overall look at the Indian system of governance, from rural to national, as depicted in level, closer to the people, while the top is the national level. In Chapter 11, we explored the left side of the pyramid; we will now take a look at the right side. 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 In Fig. 12.2 above, what similarities and differences do you notice between the Panchayati Raj system and the urban local Urban Local Bodies Local government structures in urban areas are called  urban local bodies. They are decentralised, which means that instead of operating under a central authority at the Published by Survey of India or City Council People of the Ward Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy top, the local communities have a direct say on how their areas are managed or the issues they face. It is a mechanism for citizens living in an area to come together and take decisions about what is best for them. Cities and towns are divided into smaller units called  wards, and the ward committees facilitate activities such as conducting health camps, organising a campaign against the use of single-use plastics, and so on. They also keep an eye on anything that might go wrong   a water leak, a blocked drain, a damaged road, etc.   and report such problems to the authorities. However, the precise functioning of wards differs from State to State, depending on the rules they make. Altogether, urban local bodies are responsible for a range of functions   helping take care of the infrastructure, maintaining the burial ground, garbage collection and disposal, checking the implementation of government schemes, collecting local taxes and fines, and so on. They also have some role in planning for the area s economic and social development. However, for these bodies to be 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 able to perform their functions efficiently, people living in the city must also perform their duties, which means that they must show care and concern for their area (remember, this is a participatory democracy). For instance, if people carefully follow instructions regarding waste segregation, garbage collection becomes easier; or if they notice a water leakage in a street, reporting it promptly will prevent further wastage of precious water. Can you think of four or five more actions that responsible citizens might take to help their area of the city? The Madras Corporation (now Greater Chennai Corporation), established on 29 September 1688, is the oldest municipal institution in India. The East India Company issued a charter the previous year constituting the town of  Fort St. George  and all territories within 16 km from the Fort into a corporation. A Parliamentary Act of 1792 gave the Madras Corporation power to levy municipal taxes in the city, which is when the municipal administration properly began. Fig. 12.3. The Madras Corporation SERVICES UNDER THE INDORE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION CRM*   MARRIAGE CRM   FIRE CRM   VARIOUS CRM   WATER TREE CUTTING & TREE TRANSPORTATION CRM   GRIEVANCES CRM   SERVICES ON REQUEST *CRM: Citizen Relationship Management. (The list of services offered by the Indore Municipal Corporation  is simplified here.) Fig. 12.4. Services under the Indore Municipal Corporation 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 THINK ABOUT IT Indore in Madhya Pradesh has been awarded the cleanest city in India under the Swachh Survekshan government scheme for seven years in a row. What could have been the role of Indore citizens in this achievement? As we see, Chennai and Indore have a Municipal Corpo- ration at the top of their urban bodies. Only cities with a population above 10 lakhs have a Municipal Corporation (also called  Mahanagar Nigam ) as their highest body. Between 1 and 10 lakhs, the highest body is a Municipal Council (also called  Nagar Palika ). Cities and towns with smaller populations have a Nagar Panchayat. Select a few cities, from your State and from a few neighbouring States. These may include the city you live in or the city nearest to your town or village. How will you find out if they have a Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council or Municipal Corporation? Draw a table with the names of the cities and the type of urban local body each of them has. How do urban local bodies fund their activities? (Hint: Look carefully at the pictures of the functions performed by Are some of them paid services? Sameer: Hello! I haven t seen you around here before. Are you new to Anita: Hello! Yes, I m visiting my grand- parents who live nearby. I am from the city. It s quite different from here! Sameer: Oh, really? What s it like in Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Anita: Well, it s busy and crowded, with tall buildings everywhere. There are so many people rushing around all the time, and it s noisy compared to the quietness here. Also, people are more independent and often don t even know their neighbours. Sameer: Wow! Here, everyone knows everyone else and pitches in to help each other out   we work together in the fields, celebrate festivals together, and even make decisions as Anita: Well, there s still some sense of community in the city. Just the other day, following heavy rains, a house collapsed two streets away. Dozens of people gathered from all over the place to help clear the rubble and make sure no one was trapped inside. Sameer: Doesn t the local government help in such cases? Anita: Yes, it does. In fact, we have local bodies and elected representatives who represent us and Sameer: Well, it sounds like our village Panchayat, only bigger. Members are elected, too, but because they all know each other, a lot more people can participate and discuss all kinds of issues that concern the village. Sometimes, even us kids can get heard. Anita: Really? You are not making that up? 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Sameer: Not at all! The other day a few kids noticed that an electricity wire was hanging dangerously low, almost touching the roof of a building. Not only did we report it, but we explained to one of our Gram Sabha members that an electric post should be shifted a little. And it was done! Anita: Great! I suppose that s how democracy should work. It seems more complicated in the city, but the idea is the same   everyone s voice matters. Sameer: Yes, it does! Sorry, I must make a move. My mother needs my help for a little shopping. Thanks for telling me about the city. Anita: And thanks for telling me about your village! I am definitely going to look around. Sameer: Well, maybe we ll meet again sometime. Bye! Before we move on   In urban areas, decentralised governance works through different urban local bodies, which fulfil various functions affecting the citizens  lives. As with the rural context, urban local bodies have elected members who represent the local citizens. The citizens also have duties to ensure that the local bodies are able to perform their functions efficiently. Questions, activities and projects On your way to school, you and your friends notice that a water pipe is leaking. A lot of water is being wasted on account of the leak. What would you and your friends do in such a situation? Invite a member of an urban local body near you to your class. Discuss with them their role and responsibilities. Prepare a set of questions to ask them so that the meeting Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Discuss with adult members of your family and neigh- bourhood, and make a list of their expectations from the urban local bodies. Make a list of characteristics of a good urban local body. What are the similarities and differences between the Panchayati Raj system in rural areas and the urban local * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles !


=== Class7_Polity ===

10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Grassroots Democracy   Part 1  r j nam dharmagopt ram dharmo rak hati rak hitah   The ruler protects dharma and dharma protects those who protect it.   There is no peace without justice; no justice without equality; no equality without development; no democracy without respect to the identity and dignity of cultures and peoples.  Rigoberta Mench  Tum What is the meaning of Why do we need a government? What is the meaning of  democracy ? Why is it Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Human beings have been living in communities for a long time. When a large number of people live together, there can be disagreements and disorder, and rules become necessary to maintain order and harmony in the society. There are probably some simple rules at home that you are expected to follow. The school where you study has rules too   some for students, others for teachers. In higher classes, students appearing for examinations must follow certain rules. Drivers on the road are expected to obey traffic rules. People employed in all kinds of jobs also need to follow the rules set by their employer, while the employers must also follow rules which they have committed to their employees. What would happen if no one followed those rules? A simple answer is that society would not be able to function. what differences do you see between them? How do you connect this with our discussion on rules? What are some of the rules in your school? Who made Who makes the rules and why? How are they made? These are some of the questions we will explore in this chapter. The process of taking decisions, organising the society s life with different sets of rules, and ensuring that they are followed, is called governance. The group of individuals or the system that makes the rules and ensures that they are followed is called a government. Some of the more important rules are called laws. This does not mean that rules and laws are set once and for all. Just as you might discuss a particular rule at home with your parents, or as a student body might ask the school or 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 university management to change a rule, citizens also have a say in the laws and rules governing the society. We will see how this takes place. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Can you identify the categories of public service or other activities that are represented in the ten pictures in Fig. 10.2 What role do you think the government plays in each of Can you think of other aspects of your daily life where the government plays an important role? Three Organs of Government All over the world, digital technologies have been transforming the way societies function. In India, till about 30 years ago, people who wanted to transfer money to a distant relative would have to queue up at the Post Office to send a money order after filling up a form; or if they had to send a payment to some business, they would queue up at their bank to obtain a demand draft, which would then have to be sent by post. You have probably never heard these terms ( money order  or  demand draft ), because today we have digital means of sending across money instantly! However, this has also created a new class of criminals who, without even leaving their desks, find digital ways of stealing people s money. This has led many governments to pass new laws in order to fight such criminal activities (called  cybercrime ). Some of those criminals, who believe in robbing innocent people of their hard-earned money instead of using their skills to contribute to the society, have been arrested and convicted in court. They are usually fined as well as jailed for some years. Through this example, we can see how the three branches or  organs  of a government work together: The legislature is the organ that makes new laws (or  legislates ). Sometimes it also updates or removes Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy existing laws. This is done by an assembly of represen- tatives of the people. We will soon see how the Indian The executive is the organ that implements (or  executes ) the laws. This includes the head of state (who may be a president, a prime minister or a chief minister), the ministers and any agency responsible for enforcing  law and order. (In our example above, that agency is the cyber police.) The judiciary is the system of courts which decides whether someone has broken the law and, if so, what course of action should be taken, including punishment if necessary. Sometimes it also examines whether a decision taken by the executive is right, or whether a law passed by the legislature is well conceived and fair Explain how the three government organs are at work in the case of the cybercriminals described above. How do they In a good system of governance, these three organs must be kept separate, although they interact with each other and work together. This separation is called the  separation of powers  (Fig. 10.3). It is intended to provide a system of checks and balances. This means that each organ of the government can check what the other is doing and restore balance if one organ acts beyond its expected role. 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 As a class activity, can you imagine the sort of disorder we might witness if all three organs were under the control of the same group of people? Can you describe any such real-life situation you may have heard of? Three Levels of Government Any government operates at two levels at the least   local and national. In many countries, including India, it functions at three levels or tiers   local, state or regional, and national. Each level deals with different matters. To use a comparison, if a bulb in your home is not lighting up, you will first check the bulb, switch, fuse, etc. If that does not work, you may call an electrician, and if it is found that the problem is not within your home, you may need to go to the Electricity Board and file a complaint. These are also three levels of dealing with a problem. at the town or Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy In India, we have local governments, State governments, Imagine that following heavy rain for a few days, there is a flood in a part of a district. If it is not too severe, the local authorities may be able to deal with it. If it involves several towns and many villages, the State Government will step in and send rescue teams to help affected people. But if it s a massive flood affecting vast areas, the Central Government may also come to help by sending relief supplies, the army, etc. These are the three levels again. DON T MISS OUT Many of our institutions have mottos inspired by the wisdom of our ancient texts. The Government of India s motto, for example, is Satyameva Jayate, which means  Truth alone triumphs. The Supreme Court s motto is Yato Dharmastato Jayah, or,  Where there is dharma, there is victory.  The table on the facing page provides in summary a general framework of the main functions of the government s three organs at the national and State levels. Their details (including the precise role of the assemblies) will be studied in greater depth in Grade 7. (Local government is not mentioned here as we will look at it more closely in the next two chapters.) Observe the table (Fig. 10.5). Highlight the functions and responsibilities that affect your life the most. Ask two or three adults about their connection or interaction with the government     at what levels does it take place and for what purpose? 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 It means, in our case, that of India and of a State are not the actual the affairs of where laws are Two houses     Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha    formulate national laws One State Assembly or Vidhan Sabha (Note that most States have a single assembly; a few States have two) Led by the President of India (nominal head and Supreme Commander of the Indian Armed Forces), Prime Minister as the Led by the Governor Chief Minister as the (the list is not Police, law and of laws made by the Central government at the Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Born in a humble family in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, in 1931, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam was a renowned scientist, nicknamed the  Missile Man of India  for his crucial role in the development of India s space programme, missile programme and nuclear capabilities. Dr. Abdul Kalam served as the 11th President of India from 2002 to 2007. Despite his high status, he remained deeply connected to the people, and the youth in particular, through his passion for good education and innovation. He inspired millions with his humility, dedication to social causes and commitment to the nation. He tirelessly encouraged young Indians to dream big and work hard to achieve their goals. Dr. Kalam showed that even though his position as the President of India was nominal, he could play an important role, impacting Let us meditate on a few of his inspiring thoughts:  Look at the sky. We are not alone. The whole universe is friendly to us and conspires only to give the best to those who dream and work.   To succeed in your mission, you must devotion to your goal.   If you fail, never give up because F.A.I.L. means  First Attempt In Learning. End is not the end, in fact E.N.D. means  Effort Never Dies. If you get  no  as an answer, remember N.O. means  Next Opportunity. So let s be positive.   Dream is not that which you see while sleeping; it is something that does not let you sleep.   If four things are followed   having a great aim, acquiring knowledge, hard work, and perseverance   then anything can be achieved.  Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 You may have noticed that we earlier mentioned  representatives of the people. This is one of the foundation of the world   democracy. The word  democracy  comes from two Greek words   d mos meaning  people, and kratos meaning  rule  or  power; so  democracy  literally means the  rule of the people. But can all people actually rule? It is clearly not possible. Imagine there is a problem that your class wants to bring to the attention of your school s principal   maybe there is something wrong with the classroom, or with the school s infrastructure, or perhaps you would like to propose a certain date for a field trip. Will the entire class go to the principal? It would clearly not be practical. In many schools, classes have a  class monitor  or  class representative, whom the whole class elected; even if there is none, one representative can be selected for this specific purpose. It will be enough to send the representative to the principal. It is the same principle at the State or national levels   through elections, people vote for representatives, who will be the elected members of their respective assemblies. They are generally called  Members of Legislative Assembly  (or MLAs) at the State level, and  Member of Parliament  (or MPs) at the national level. All these members discuss laws, problems and solutions in the assemblies, and, through dialogue and debate, try to convince each other whenever there are different therefore, India is a representative democracy. It is also the world s Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy largest democracy, with some 970 million voters in 2024! In principle, all Indian citizens above the age of 18 have the right to participate in these elections. Imagine that your class is planning to go for a picnic. There are two possible places, A and B. The class discusses the pros and cons   distance, time, cost, availability of basic facilities, etc. It becomes difficult to arrive at a decision. So your teacher decides that voting can solve the problem. The number of students in favour of place A raise their hands, then the number of students in favour of place B raise theirs. The decision is taken by whichever option gets a larger number of raised hands. (This process is called voting.) This is a case of direct democracy where every student s opinion was taken to finalise the place. The term grassroots democracy refers to a system that enables and encourages the participation of ordinary citizens   the base of the pyramid we saw in Fig. 10.4 on decisions which affect them. We will study more features of Indian democracy in the next two chapters and also in later grades. Before we move on... No country can run without governance and government. A modern government has three organs   legislative, executive and judiciary   which need to work together. The Indian government functions at three levels   Centre or national, State and local. Democracy is the overall framework for this system. It functions through elected representatives, both at the State and the national levels. 10   Grassroots Democracy   Part 1 Questions, activities and projects Test yourself   What is the meaning of democracy? What is the difference between direct democracy and Recall the three organs of government. What are their Why do we need three tiers of government? Project: Many of you will remember the lockdown that took place during the COVID-19 pandemic. Make a list of all the actions that were taken at that time? Which tiers of government were involved in managing the situation? What was the role of each of the organs of government? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Local Government in The real India lives in its villages.   M.K. Gandhi Let us now see how the government functions at the local level. In this chapter, our focus will be on local government in rural areas; we will move to urban areas in the next chapter. India is a country of enormous size and diversity. We have about 600,000 villages, 8,000 towns and over 4,000 cities. Our population has crossed 1.4 billion, almost two-thirds of which live in rural areas. How do we govern ourselves in this Let us take a trip to Lakshmanpur, a small village in the foothills of the Himalayas. It has 200 houses and a population of about 700, most of whom are farmers. People cultivate What are Panchayati Raj What are their functions? Why are they important in governance and democracy? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy their lands and rear cows or goats. Some have relatives serving in the armed forces; a few younger villagers have migrated to the city in search of jobs. What are the needs of this village   maybe water for the fields, repairing the main road if it got damaged by heavy rains, or maintaining the village s primary school? How will the villagers take decisions about such matters that affect their daily lives? And where will they get the resources to meet those needs? What will happen if there is a dispute about land or if some of the crop is stolen? Many such questions can arise in a village. Can people run to the State or the national capital for every such issue? Panchayati Raj System Like every village in India, the Lakshmanpur people have a system of local government called  Panchayat, which refers to a village council. Panchayats bring governance closer to the people, making it possible for them to actively participate in decision-making processes. That is why the Panchayat system, also known as Panchayati Raj, is a form of self-government. Panchayats play a vital role in addressing local issues, promoting development and ensuring that the benefits of government schemes reach the grassroots level. Village Parishad / Block Panchayat / Panchayat Samiti / 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 As is clear from the diagram, the Panchayati Raj system works at three levels   from bottom up   the village, the block and the district. This is called a  three-tier system. Together, these institutions  responsibilities cover almost all aspects of life in the district, from agriculture, housing, maintenance of roads, management of water resources, education, health care and social welfare to cultural Panchayat, which is closest to the people in rural areas. Its members are elected directly by the Gram Sabha, which is a group of adults from a village (or group of neighbouring villages) who are enrolled as voters. In the Gram Sabha, women and men discuss all matters related to their area and take decisions. Each Gram Panchayat elects a head or president called the  Sarpanch  or  Pradhan. In recent years, more and more women have become Sarpanchs. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Dnyaneshwar Kamble is a transgender person who was elected Sarpanch of Tarangfal village in the Solapur district of Maharashtra in 2017. Kamble s motto is lok seva, gram seva, that is,  Service to the village is service to the public.  Kamble defeated six other candidates to become the Sarpanch. in Madhya Pradesh, defied patriarchal norms to become the first female Sarpanch of her village. She convinced women in the village to attend the Sabha meetings and addressed critical issues like education and sanitation, Vandana s journey shows how women can play a leading role  in transforming Hiware Bazar, a village in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra, used to be affected by frequent droughts and poor agricultural yield. After Popatrao Baguji Pawar became its Sarpanch, he started applying Anna Hazare s model of rainwater harvesting, watershed conservation and massive tree planting of lakhs of trees, all of which contributed to the recharge of groundwater. With the collaboration of the villagers, Hiware Bazar became a green and prosperous village in a few years. Shri Popatrao Pawar was awarded the Padma Shri in 2020. 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 The Gram Panchayat is assisted by a Panchayat Secretary who performs administrative functions such as calling meetings and maintaining records. Most Gram Panchayats are also assisted by an officer called  Patwari  in many parts of India, who maintains the villagers  land records. In some cases, the Patwari keeps maps that are generations old! THINK ABOUT IT How do you think can these old maps be helpful for us? Can they tell us something about the past and the present? Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative Panchayats are supposed to listen to everyone s voice   including the voice of children. The Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative creates opportunities for children to express their ideas and opinions on matters that concern their wellbeing. Steps are being taken in several States to encourage the participation of children in Bal Sabhas and Bal Panchayats on a regular basis, while village elders try to find solutions to their concerns. In Maharashtra, for example, a few Bal Panchayats have worked to eliminate child labour and child marriage. They have brought many children back to school. The Bal Panchayat members get together to convince parents and other adults to send their wards back to school, and not to arrange marriages for girls who should be studying. Several Gram Panchayats have won awards for taking child-friendly initiatives. Here s an example from Sikkim: Sangkhu Radhu Khandu Gram Panchayat, in west Sikkim, has given a lot of importance to children s needs and rights. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy The Panchayat has built compound walls for schools to make them safer for children. To ensure that students get hygienically cooked midday meals, the Gram Panchayat has constructed kitchens in the schools. It is for these efforts that Sangkhu Radhu Khandu has been declared a child- friendly Gram Panchayat. Let us also look at another example from Rajasthan: The  Children s Parliament, an offshoot of Bunker Roy s  Barefoot College  initiative a few decades ago, empowered underprivileged children in Rajasthan s rural areas through education and democratic participation. Children aged 8 to 14 are engaged in governance processes, learning about democracy and social responsibility through night schools and parliament-like elections. The  Parliament  followed formal procedures, including voter ID cards and campaigning. Elected representatives formed a  Cabinet, overseeing school management and advocating for community needs. The initiative fostered leadership skills and social awareness, enabling children to challenge societal norms and advocate for change. Children actively addressed issues such as access to education, sanitation and 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2 Children s Parliament initiative received many accolades, including the World s Children s Honorary Award in 2001. As a class activity, let four or five students form a Bal Panchayat and the rest of the class imagine they are the villagers. What issues will the Gram Sabha discuss? What challenges could it encounter? What solutions will it propose? Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad Similar institutions exist at the block level and the district level, which are above the village level. Their names are listed in the pyramidal diagram we saw in Fig. 11.1 on page 164. The Panchayat Samiti at the block level is the link between the Gram Panchayat and the Zila Parishad at the district level. The members of these institutions are elected by the local people, but they may have other members like Sarpanchs of the villages in the area and local members of the State Legislative Assembly. The composition of the Panchayat Samitis differs from State to State, but their role in strengthening the participation of local people remains the same. They coordinate matters across Gram Panchayats, for instance, by collecting development plans from all Gram Panchayats and putting them together to present them at the District or State levels respectively. This facilitates the allotment of funds for such development projects and for government schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, which promotes the construction of all-weather roads in rural areas. At all the three levels, special rules have been made so that disadvantaged sections of the population can make their needs and problems heard. These institutions also have a provision for reserving one-third of the seats for women. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think it is important for the government to pay more attention to the needs and problems of the disadvantaged sections of society? What similarities and differences do you notice between the governance system at the Central level and at the Panchayat level? (Hint: refer back to Chapter 10 if required.) If you get an opportunity to meet a few Panchayat members, what questions would you like to ask them? Discuss in small groups to create a questionnaire. Meet some Gram Panchayat members or invite them to your school. Ask them the questions in your questionnaire and write a short report. Let us remember that the structure and functions of the Panchayati Raj institutions differ a little across States. This is because the States have authority over those institutions. But their objectives are the same   it is to enable villagers to take an active part in the management and development of their villages and the local area. The Artha h stra is an ancient text of governance written by Kau ilya (later also known as Ch akya) some 2,300 years ago. Among other things, it describes how a state should be structured and run, how the economy can be made prosperous, what the duties of the ruler are and how to conduct war. Kau ilya, an expert in statecraft, also explains how a whole administrative structure should be put in place from the village to the regional capital: 11   Grassroots Democracy   Part 2  The king shall establish a sangraha a (a sub-district head quarters) for every 10 villages; a k rva ika (district headquarters) for every 100 villages; a dro amukha for every 400 villages; and a sth n ya (provincial headquarters) for every 800 villages.  In today s language, what are the names we would give these four categories? Is it not amazing that a similar structure was thought of so long ago? Before we move on... The local government in rural areas is organised into a Democracy in the Panchayati Raj system works both through direct participation of people and through their The Panchayati Raj institutions give people in rural areas a measure of self-governance, so they may manage their issues and collaborate in development plans. Questions, activities and projects Test yourself   without looking at the text above, can you name the three tiers of the Panchayati Raj system? What are the key functions of each of the three tiers? Write a letter to the Sarpanch regarding the issue of plastic bags lying on the roadside in the village. In your view, what type of person should be a Gram Let us suppose that you study in a village school. The school is located next to a highway and students find it difficult to cross the road when they come to school or leave at the end of the day. What are the options to solve this issue? Which institutions in the Panchayati Raj can help you? What can the students do? Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles ! 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Local Government in I desire that   a full-fledged local body should be immediately formed,   so that people may know really what is an administration, what are the franchise, what are the powers, what are the rights and what are the privileges in a small sphere, in their own town, in their own villages. What are urban local bodies and what are their functions? Why are they important in governance and democracy? Fig. 12.1. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (originally  Bombay Municipal Corporation ) was created in 1865.   Rustom K. Sidhwa, Member, Constituent Assembly (during the Constituent Assembly Debates, 13 October 1949) Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Earlier chapters have shown us how, in a democracy, good governance aims to empower the citizens so they may actively participate in their country s functioning, whether it is at the rural, regional, urban, state or national level. This is the broader concept of participatory democracy. We saw the basics of the system in a rural context. Let us now see how it works in an urban scenario. Since the latter is generally more complex and diverse than the former, it is understandable that the urban governance system needs to be more complex too. We will however limit ourselves here to its basic principles. Why is a city like Kolkata, Chennai or Mumbai more complex and diverse than a village or a town? With your classmates, make a list of diverse communities residing in any city that you are familiar with. How many were you able to list? What else do you observe in the list? Before we explore governance and administration in urban areas, it helps to take an overall look at the Indian system of governance, from rural to national, as depicted in level, closer to the people, while the top is the national level. In Chapter 11, we explored the left side of the pyramid; we will now take a look at the right side. 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 In Fig. 12.2 above, what similarities and differences do you notice between the Panchayati Raj system and the urban local Urban Local Bodies Local government structures in urban areas are called  urban local bodies. They are decentralised, which means that instead of operating under a central authority at the Published by Survey of India or City Council People of the Ward Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy top, the local communities have a direct say on how their areas are managed or the issues they face. It is a mechanism for citizens living in an area to come together and take decisions about what is best for them. Cities and towns are divided into smaller units called  wards, and the ward committees facilitate activities such as conducting health camps, organising a campaign against the use of single-use plastics, and so on. They also keep an eye on anything that might go wrong   a water leak, a blocked drain, a damaged road, etc.   and report such problems to the authorities. However, the precise functioning of wards differs from State to State, depending on the rules they make. Altogether, urban local bodies are responsible for a range of functions   helping take care of the infrastructure, maintaining the burial ground, garbage collection and disposal, checking the implementation of government schemes, collecting local taxes and fines, and so on. They also have some role in planning for the area s economic and social development. However, for these bodies to be 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 able to perform their functions efficiently, people living in the city must also perform their duties, which means that they must show care and concern for their area (remember, this is a participatory democracy). For instance, if people carefully follow instructions regarding waste segregation, garbage collection becomes easier; or if they notice a water leakage in a street, reporting it promptly will prevent further wastage of precious water. Can you think of four or five more actions that responsible citizens might take to help their area of the city? The Madras Corporation (now Greater Chennai Corporation), established on 29 September 1688, is the oldest municipal institution in India. The East India Company issued a charter the previous year constituting the town of  Fort St. George  and all territories within 16 km from the Fort into a corporation. A Parliamentary Act of 1792 gave the Madras Corporation power to levy municipal taxes in the city, which is when the municipal administration properly began. Fig. 12.3. The Madras Corporation SERVICES UNDER THE INDORE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION CRM*   MARRIAGE CRM   FIRE CRM   VARIOUS CRM   WATER TREE CUTTING & TREE TRANSPORTATION CRM   GRIEVANCES CRM   SERVICES ON REQUEST *CRM: Citizen Relationship Management. (The list of services offered by the Indore Municipal Corporation  is simplified here.) Fig. 12.4. Services under the Indore Municipal Corporation 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 THINK ABOUT IT Indore in Madhya Pradesh has been awarded the cleanest city in India under the Swachh Survekshan government scheme for seven years in a row. What could have been the role of Indore citizens in this achievement? As we see, Chennai and Indore have a Municipal Corpo- ration at the top of their urban bodies. Only cities with a population above 10 lakhs have a Municipal Corporation (also called  Mahanagar Nigam ) as their highest body. Between 1 and 10 lakhs, the highest body is a Municipal Council (also called  Nagar Palika ). Cities and towns with smaller populations have a Nagar Panchayat. Select a few cities, from your State and from a few neighbouring States. These may include the city you live in or the city nearest to your town or village. How will you find out if they have a Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council or Municipal Corporation? Draw a table with the names of the cities and the type of urban local body each of them has. How do urban local bodies fund their activities? (Hint: Look carefully at the pictures of the functions performed by Are some of them paid services? Sameer: Hello! I haven t seen you around here before. Are you new to Anita: Hello! Yes, I m visiting my grand- parents who live nearby. I am from the city. It s quite different from here! Sameer: Oh, really? What s it like in Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Anita: Well, it s busy and crowded, with tall buildings everywhere. There are so many people rushing around all the time, and it s noisy compared to the quietness here. Also, people are more independent and often don t even know their neighbours. Sameer: Wow! Here, everyone knows everyone else and pitches in to help each other out   we work together in the fields, celebrate festivals together, and even make decisions as Anita: Well, there s still some sense of community in the city. Just the other day, following heavy rains, a house collapsed two streets away. Dozens of people gathered from all over the place to help clear the rubble and make sure no one was trapped inside. Sameer: Doesn t the local government help in such cases? Anita: Yes, it does. In fact, we have local bodies and elected representatives who represent us and Sameer: Well, it sounds like our village Panchayat, only bigger. Members are elected, too, but because they all know each other, a lot more people can participate and discuss all kinds of issues that concern the village. Sometimes, even us kids can get heard. Anita: Really? You are not making that up? 12   Grassroots Democracy   Part 3 Sameer: Not at all! The other day a few kids noticed that an electricity wire was hanging dangerously low, almost touching the roof of a building. Not only did we report it, but we explained to one of our Gram Sabha members that an electric post should be shifted a little. And it was done! Anita: Great! I suppose that s how democracy should work. It seems more complicated in the city, but the idea is the same   everyone s voice matters. Sameer: Yes, it does! Sorry, I must make a move. My mother needs my help for a little shopping. Thanks for telling me about the city. Anita: And thanks for telling me about your village! I am definitely going to look around. Sameer: Well, maybe we ll meet again sometime. Bye! Before we move on   In urban areas, decentralised governance works through different urban local bodies, which fulfil various functions affecting the citizens  lives. As with the rural context, urban local bodies have elected members who represent the local citizens. The citizens also have duties to ensure that the local bodies are able to perform their functions efficiently. Questions, activities and projects On your way to school, you and your friends notice that a water pipe is leaking. A lot of water is being wasted on account of the leak. What would you and your friends do in such a situation? Invite a member of an urban local body near you to your class. Discuss with them their role and responsibilities. Prepare a set of questions to ask them so that the meeting Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Discuss with adult members of your family and neigh- bourhood, and make a list of their expectations from the urban local bodies. Make a list of characteristics of a good urban local body. What are the similarities and differences between the Panchayati Raj system in rural areas and the urban local * Noodles  is our abbreviation for  Notes and Doodles !


=== Class8_Polity ===

Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System [India] adopted the principle of adult franchise with an abundant faith in the common man and the ultimate success of democratic rule never before in the history of the world has such an experiment been so boldly   Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates What is universal adult What is an electoral system? How does India s electoral Fig. 5.1. Headlines of major newspapers during the 2024 Lok Sabha elections granted by the that is used is  suffrage  a Universal Adult Franchise The Constitution makers decided that universal adult franchise would be a feature of Indian democracy right from the outset. This means that every adult citizen gets one vote, and all votes have equal value. Hence, every Indian citizen aged 18 and above has the right to vote   irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion, gender, education, income, etc. The word  universal  India changed the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18 in 1988. Discuss whether this was a good move. Universal franchise is a cornerstone of Indian democracy. Elections to the Lok Sabha, the legislative assembly of every state and union territory, and all the local elections in villages and cities are based on universal franchise (Article 326 of the Constitution). Remember that no one can vote on another s Can you calculate how long you have to wait before you To be able to exercise your right, you need to be registered as a voter in your constituency. However, one is barred from voting if found guilty of committing certain serious crimes. Why is everyone Just voting? It s the biggest celebration of our democracy   the general elections! Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Do you remember India had a general election in the summer of 2024? About 980 million voters were eligible to exercise their franchise for the 543 constituencies of the Lok Sabha. DON T MISS OUT India has 3.1 million elected representatives (1.3 million of them women) in more than 250,000 local government bodies across India. All these are democratically elected through universal We need an elaborate and well-organised system to manage this massive exercise and ensure that the elections take place fairly and freely. In this chapter, we will briefly explore who can vote, a few of the types of elections we have, the electoral system, and how it is organised. DON T MISS OUT Before Independence, only 13 per cent of Indians were allowed to vote, and franchise was not universal. We will delve more into this in another part of the textbook. India was among the early nations to grant women the right to vote, ahead of many the world. For were given the right to vote in Switzerland only in 1971. Women fought long and hard in many countries to win this fundamental democratic right. In India, on the other hand, a progressive constitutional vision and deep democratic values rooted in India s ancient traditions ensured women had voting rights from the very beginning. An area whose voters elect a to a legislative A group of to achieve a Fig. 5.3. Women s suffrage parade, USA, 1913 Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System In 1947, our literacy rate was about 14 per cent, only about 8 per cent among women. Some argued that the right to vote should be given only to literate people. Discuss in your group why the Constitution makers may have decided on universal franchise from the time of Independence itself. There are several reasons why universal franchise is so important. A few are illustrated in the mindmap below. Can you add some more? Fig. 5.4. Importance of universal franchise in a democracy. Add two reasons of your own in the empty boxes. Bridging Barriers, Enabling Participation: Ensuring Universal Democracy thrives when every eligible citizen can freely and fairly participate in the electoral process. Voting in elections is a powerful way for people to express their will. How does this take place in India? type of future they want and who can best in their area based on caste, them out in Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 India is a large, diverse, and complex country. To illustrate, the population of eligible voters in India is fifteen times the population of the United Kingdom, and in terms of area, India is six times larger than France. Geographic diversity is a challenge, too. Thus, elections in India need to be organised taking this complexity into account. The Election Commission of India organises elections in India. (We will learn more about ECI later in the chapter.) The ECI has taken several innovative accessibility measures to remove barriers to exercising the franchise and ensure no voter is left Electoral officials travel to remote locations to ensure every citizen can exercise their democratic right. In 2024, for the first time, the elderly and people with disabilities could cast their votes from home, and the postal voting option was available for a specific category of voters. Assistive technologies like braille- enabled voter cards and app-based requests for assistance, including wheelchairs and ramps, were also made possible. Discuss in groups   What role do such measures play in a democracy? Do you know of anyone who benefited from these improved accessibility measures? How might they increase voter participation in your neighbourhood? How can technology assist? If you have access to the internet, visit the ECI disabilities). Read and interventions that the ECI has taken to facilitate voting by people with Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Fig. 5.6. India s electoral system  endeavours to enable every citizen to exercise their franchise. This includes measures such as organising a polling station for a single woman voter, postal voting and providing wheelchair assistance. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 About 34 per cent of eligible voters did not exercise their right to vote in the 2024 elections. Why do you think this is so? What are some challenges people face in exercising their rights? Design and conduct a short survey among adults in your family and neighbourhood to answer these questions. Analyse the data and write a report with suggestions on how it may be possible to ensure everyone votes. DON T MISS OUT The Uttaramerur inscriptions from the 10th century describe a transparent process for the selection of representatives. Eligible candidates  names were written on fragments of palm leaves and placed in a pot, which was then sealed. On the selection day, it was opened publicly and a young boy drew the palm leaves randomly one by one; a respected individual, after showing his empty hands to the public, would read out each name of the Election for class representative   Grade 8, It was time for the annual election (Class Rep). The Class Rep would represent the class in meetings with teachers, organise events, and act as a bridge between the students and school authorities. Three students   Ahmed, Gurmat, and Ravi   decided to contest for the position. The class teacher, Ms. Usha, was appointed as the Election Officer to ensure the election process was fair, transparent, and followed all the Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Here s a brief introduction of each of the candidates: Ahmed promised to improve the cleanliness of the classrooms and the Gurmat was interested in helping all her classmates learn better. She proposed creating a system of peer coaching and mutual support. Ravi wanted to make more space in their class timetable for the arts curriculum   music, theatre, and visual art   in line with the new Ahmed put up posters, Gurmat used the noticeboard and spoke to classmates, while Ravi held a lunchtime music performance to promote his idea. As the Election Officer, Ms. Usha had to organise the elections and ensure it was conducted fairly. She explained the rules to the class, ensuring everyone understood how the secret ballot voting process would work; no one would know who voted for whom, ensuring the process was private and fair. She set up the voting booths in the corner of the classroom. On election day, each student was given a ballot paper with the names of the three candidates. The students were asked to mark an  X  next to the name of the candidate they wished to vote for. Ms. Usha also ensured that there was a ballot paper in braille for Neha. After all the students voted, Ms. Usha collected the ballots in a box and sealed it until the counting Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 After all the 33 votes were cast, Ms. Usha called Ms Sheeba from the next class to witness the counting process. One of the ballot papers was not marked, so it was declared invalid. The results were announced: Ahmed received 8 votes, Gurmat 12 and Ravi 10. Gurmat, with the most votes, was declared the new Class Representative. She thanked her classmates and promised to fulfil her commitments. Ahmed and Ravi congratulated her and offered to support her. What are the most important aspects of the election process in this caselet? Why was it important to have a secret ballot? What considerations might the students have had while exercising their choice? Do you think the students have any responsibility after Gurmat was elected as the class rep? If yes, what are they? What was the role that Ms. Usha played? Why was it Why was it important for Ms. Usha to organise a braille ballot paper for Neha? What would happen if many students in the class chose not to mark a preference? DON T MISS OUT Imagine if a student did not want to vote for any of the candidates   Ahmed, Gurmat, or Ravi. What option would they have? Some countries, including India, offer an additional option, NOTA   None Of The Above. This option allows voters to reject all candidates if they are not satisfied with any of them. It doesn t change the result but sends a message   voters want better choices. NOTA is a quiet but powerful tool in a democracy. Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System The Role of the Election Commission of India (ECI) We have seen the size and diversity that needs to be kept in mind in the organisation of the election process in India. In this section, we will look at the different types of elections that the ECI organises and oversees. India is a parliamentary democracy where, at the national level, citizens choose representatives for the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Parliament). They focus on issues affecting the entire country. In addition, voters elect representatives from their constituencies to the legislative assemblies in the state and union territories where they are registered. These members focus primarily on regional issues. These are just two of the elections that the ECI manages; we will see more in the later sections. However, before we get a glimpse of the election process, let us get introduced to the Election Commission of India, the institution that oversees it. In Grade 6, you read about direct elections to gram panchayats and urban local bodies. The State Election Commissions Election Commission of India   A brief introduction The Election Commission of India (ECI) is an independent constitutional body responsible for conducting free and fair elections. It was established in 1950 and conducts elections to the Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies in India, and the offices of the President and Vice President. The first general elections in independent India were held in 1951- Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 5.11. Structure of the Election Commission of India Election Commission of India At State/UT level At District level Returning Officer (RO) (manages voter list) The ECI performs crucial tasks like: Fig. 5.9. Tasks performed by the Election Commission of India Fig. 5.10. Office of the the Election Commission of India in Delhi Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Managing the electoral process Managing elections in India is a mammoth task. The ECI has been upgrading its capacities to keep pace with the needs of modern India in conducting free and fair elections. The electoral system is massive and needs to work efficiently. We take the example of the Lok Sabha elections to illustrate this. Note that the elections to the state assemblies follow a similar process. All elections take place at different times but with some periodicity; so every year, several polls are conducted in various parts of the country based on when they are due. Fig. 5.12. A few numbers showing the scale of the 2024 Lok Sabha elections. As you can see, the numbers are very large. Many people are deployed to assist the whole process, including teachers. Identify teachers in your school or vicinity who may have performed election duty. Invite them to your class to share Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 DON T MISS OUT 84 of the Lok Sabha constituencies are reserved for persons from the scheduled castes, while 47 are reserved for scheduled Fig. 5.15. Shyam Saran Negi, a school teacher in Himachal Pradesh, was the first voter in India s general elections of 1951. Here, in 2017, he cast his vote at the age of 100. Fig. 5.14. Managing the elections   extensive use of technology Process of voting for the Lok Sabha and State assemblies 4th Press button to vote on the electronic voting machine (EVM); you hear a beep sound. Also check the printed slip in VVPAT. 1st polling officer: Checks name on voter list and ID proof. 2nd polling officer: Inks finger, gives chit and takes your 3rd polling officer: Takes chit and checks your finger. NOTA (None Of The Above) option is also available. Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) systems have been used in countries like Namibia ECI. Other countries have also studied this technology and have received training from India to adopt it in their countries. VVPAT is a system that produces a physical paper record, allowing voters to verify that their electronic votes were cast correctly. This paper trail provides a backup for verification and recounting purposes in case of disputes or failures of the electronic system. Model Code of Conduct (MCC) The code is followed to ensure free and fair elections, listing the dos and don ts for leaders, political parties, and candidates that must be adhered to. A few elements of the code: There are rules that the party in government must follow; this ensures that the resources available to the government are not used for the purpose of the elections. For example, no new schemes and projects are to be announced that may All candidates are expected to exercise discretion and restraint to ensure that the elections take place peacefully. Influencing voters through gifts in return for votes is Fig. 5.16. Electronic voting machines Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Here are a few types of complaints that the ECI handles. Why do you think these might be violations of the code of DON T MISS OUT The Model Code of Conduct was adopted in Kerala in 1960, voluntarily approved by representatives of the major political parties of the time. The ECI circulated it to political parties during the 1962 general elections, and from 1991, the ECI became proactive in ensuring the observance of the MCC. Fig. 5.17. A candidate distributed sarees and household appliances to women voters. Fig. 5.19. Officials of the government campaigning for the ruling party. Fig. 5.18. Abusive language used by the candidate of one party against the candidate from an opposing party. Fig. 5.20. Bundles of  500/- notes found in the car of a candidate Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System DON T MISS OUT T.N. Seshan became the Chief Election Commissioner in 1990. He brought in reforms to ensure free and fair elections, precise rules, voter IDs to eliminate proxy voting, and strict vigilance on spending by candidates. T.N. Seshan worked hard to protect the rights of voters and is often remembered as the officer who made Indian elections fairer, transparent and fearless! When is the next election in the region where you are located? Is it to the state, urban local body or panchayat? Understanding Elections in India   A Very Brief Overview Election to the Lok Sabha and State Elections in India are often referred to as the  Festival of Democracy    a time when citizens exercise their right to choose representatives freely, fairly, and responsibly. We know that India follows a parliamentary system of government where citizens participate in various levels of elections   Lok Sabha (national level), state legislative assemblies (state level) and local bodies (city and village level). The country is divided into 543 constituencies for the Lok Sabha elections. The elected candidates to the Lok Sabha are known as Members of Parliament (MPs), whereas candidates elected to state assemblies are known as Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs). India uses the  First-Past-the-Post  electoral system, wherein the candidate receiving the most votes in a Fig. 5.21. T.N. Seshan Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 constituency wins. This means that a candidate can win without securing even 50 per cent of the total votes (like Gurmat won despite getting only 12 out of the 33 votes). DON T MISS OUT The legislative assembly is called by several names in regional languages, for example, Vidhan Sabha and Niyama Sabha. What is it called in your state? After the voting process is completed, the process of government formation begins. The political party or coalition winning a majority of the seats in the Lok Sabha forms the national government. The leader of this majority typically becomes the prime minister. Similarly, at the state level, the leader of the majority party becomes the chief minister. What's the difference between an MP and an MLA? MPs represent us in the national parliament, while MLAs represent us in our state assembly. Both are chosen through similar electoral processes but work at different levels of governance. If a party or coalition wins a majority of the seats in the Lok Sabha, it forms the national government and its leader becomes the prime minister. In states, if a party or coalition wins a majority of seats in the State Assembly, it forms the government and its leader becomes the state s As we saw in Fig. 5.11, the State Election Commission is a part of the election apparatus. It plays an important role not only in general and state elections but also in conducting elections to Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System local bodies at the grassroots level. It works in consultation with the ECI in these matters, and universal adult franchise, and all other Constitutional provisions applicable in the case of direct elections by the people are pertinent here too. Who are the MP and MLA / MLAs of the constituency you are located in? (A Lok Sabha constituency may have two or more assembly constituencies.) Which party does each of them belong to? What are the concerns of the MP and MLA, respectively? Election to the Rajya Sabha The candidates elected to the Rajya Sabha are also known as Members of Parliament (MPs), but they are chosen through Let us revisit the example of Suryodaya School. Imagine that the school is setting up a special council at the school level. If the members of this council are elected by the class representatives, it would be an indirect election. Of the 245 members of the Rajya Sabha, 233 are elected by the elected members of the state legislative assemblies (MLAs), while the President of India nominates 12. Each state is allotted a different number of Rajya Sabha seats based on population. For example, more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more seats than less populous states like Arunachal Pradesh. The Rajya Sabha is also called the Permanent House   it is never dissolved. A member of the Rajya Sabha has a six-year term. One- third of its members retire every two years, and new members There is a difference, however, in the voting process. It uses what is called a  single transferable vote system. This is a special way of ensuring that smaller states also get fair representation in the Rajya Sabha. You will learn more about the exact mechanism of how this works in higher classes. due to the end of its term or other Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Rajya Sabha: The Council of States MLAs vote using a single transferable vote system, ranking candidates by preference. Rajya Sabha members are elected by MLAs through indirect elections, while the President nominates 12 Seat allocation is based on state populations; more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more Rajya Sabha is a permanent body; one-third of its members retire every two years, ensuring Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Election of the President of India The President of India is not directly elected by the common people. Instead, an electoral college is formed to carry out the election. This Electoral College consists of: Members of Parliament (MPs) from both the houses of the Parliament   Lok Sabha (Lower House) and the Rajya Sabha (Upper House) Members of the Legislative Assemblies (MLAs) from each of India s states and the union territories of Delhi and The single transferable vote system is followed in this election. Since the president represents the whole country, this method ensures the support of both the central and state governments. The rules for voting and counting are very elaborate; the more populous states have a greater say. (We need not go into the details at this stage.) The following group of people is not involved in electing the President of India: Nominated members of Rajya Sabha (12) Nominated members of State Legislative Assemblies Members of Legislative Councils (both elected and nominated) in bicameral legislatures Nominated members of union territories of Delhi and THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think the above group of people is not involved in electing the President of India? Why are the common people not involved in the election of the president? representatives vote to elect the President. This maintains democratic legitimacy, as the President is meant to represent the will of the people, indirectly but meaningfully. is a system is divided into Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Election of the Vice President of India The Vice President of India is elected by an electoral college consisting of the elected and nominated members of both Houses of Parliament; again, the system of single transferable vote is used. The vice president is the chairperson of the Rajya Sabha. If there are situations when the president is not able to discharge their function, the vice president steps in to play the role. Challenges and The Road Ahead India s electoral system is celebrated as the world s largest democratic exercise. However, like all systems, it faces its share of challenges. Issues such as the growing influence of money in elections, a significant proportion of candidates with criminal records, and voter apathy, (particularly in urban areas), raise important questions about the health and future of our The way forward lies in empowering voters with the information they need to make thoughtful and responsible choices. Media, education, and awareness campaigns must work together to help people, especially the youth, understand the importance of voting wisely. An aware and vigilant voter is the strongest safeguard of a democratic system. It starts with asking the right questions   and ends with casting a responsible vote. Before we move on  Universal adult franchise is the cornerstone of Indian The right to vote is a responsibility, too. It needs to be taken seriously by every voter. Voter awareness is an important aspect of the right to vote. It is important to facilitate the participation of all The Election Commission of India is the Constitutional body that conducts elections in the country. Governance and Democracy 5   Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System The ECI oversees all the elections in the country, including those of the president and vice president. Indian democracy faces challenges that call for the voters  vigilance and awareness. Questions and activities 1. Why is universal adult franchise important for a healthy 2. What is the meaning of  secret ballot ? Why is this important in a democracy? 3. Give examples of direct and indirect elections. 4. How is the election of members to the Lok Sabha different from that to the Rajya Sabha? 5. What, in your view, are the advantages of the EVM over 6. Voter turnout has been declining in some urban areas of India. What could be the reasons for this trend, and what steps can be taken to encourage more people to vote? 7. Why do you think a proportion of seats in the Lok Sabha is reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes? Write a 8. Social media is changing the way we experience elections   from catchy campaign reels and live speeches to political debates on Instagram and Twitter. But is this strengthening democracy or confusing it? Discuss in pairs: What are the benefits, what are the challenges, and what might the future of elections be in a digital age? 9. Visit the website https://www.indiavotes.com, and choose a parliamentary constituency election from any year and explore its results. Do the same for an assembly election in your state. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive The Constitution is not a mere lawyer s document; it is a vehicle of life, and its spirit is always the spirit of the age.   Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates Fig. 6.1. Features of the new Parliament building What is India s parliamentary system, and how is it structured? What are the key functions of the Parliament? What are the roles of the legislature and the executive in India s Parliamentary How are the legislature and the executive organised at the union and state levels? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 round   it s like a soft It also uses green electricity use by 30 per cent. design reflects balance, inclusivity, and purpose. The Grade 8 students from Nalanda Vidyalaya were on a school trip to Delhi. Usha, Sukhwinder, Anjali, John, and Farida were especially excited to visit the new Parliament building. Inside, they saw lotuses, tribal art, Exactly, democracy must look ahead   but never forget its roots. It feels like a museum of India. The Ashokan emblem! Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive India s independence was achieved through great sacrifices by many people of the country after years of struggle against colonial rule. The citizens of a free country could now make decisions about their own governance. The first important step in this new epoch in the life of our nation was the drafting of the Constitution of independent India. This comprehensive document laid foundational principles for the nation, including that of Universal Adult Franchise which guarantees all adult citizens of the country the right to vote irrespective of their social or economic background, gender, race, or religion. The people of India directly elect their representatives who become members of the Lok Sabha. A majority group from among these elected representatives forms the government. The Parliament is the supreme legislative body of the government (it makes laws for the country). It comprises all elected representatives of the people and controls and guides the work of the government. The government can therefore be seen as functioning with the people s consent. There have been 17 Lok Sabhas since the first one in 1952. The 18th Lok Sabha was constituted in June 2024. Fig. 6.3. The Parliament Building (Sansad Bhavan) in New Delhi was constructed to accommodate the growing needs including capacity, technology, sustainability and safety. Fig. 6.2. Our old Parliament (now called Samvidhan Sadan) building was constructed in the 1920s. The Constituent Assembly met there for its deliberations, and it served as Parliament House for over seven decades. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Composition of the Parliament The Indian Parliament is composed of the President and two houses: the Lok Sabha (House of the People / Lower House) and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States / Upper House). This structure with two houses is called a  bicameral  system ( bi  means two,  cameral  means chamber / house). Fig. 6.4. Lok Sabha Chambers in the new Parliament building Fig. 6.5. A view of the Chamber of the Rajya Sabha taken from the Press Gallery The people of India choose their representatives for the Lok Sabha through a direct election (based on universal adult suffrage). The maximum number of members of this House envisaged by the Constitution is 550. The Members of Parliament (MPs) in the Rajya Sabha are elected indirectly by the electoral college that you read about in the previous chapter. Both, the number of Rajya Sabha seats allocated and the number of MPs represented in the Lok Sabha, are based on the population of each state. Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive DON T MISS OUT We are aware that several aspects of the Indian Constitution were drawn from the constitutions of inspired our system of Parliamentary democracy. However, there were also experiences that our freedom fighters and Constitution makers had   the practical experience gained colonial governance structures, even if in a very limited way, that provided familiarity with Parliamentary procedures; the memory of the ancient republics (maha janapadas); the village panchayats where elders made collective decisions, as we learnt in a Extensive discussions took place during the making of the Constitution regarding whether India should have a bicameral system. It was felt that a single directly elected House would be inadequate to meet the challenges independent India would face. In the spirit of  federalism, it was felt that a Council of States, the Rajya Sabha, was needed. The composition and process of election to the Rajya Sabha were also designed to be different. India practices federalism, which is a form of government where power is distributed between the centre, states, as well as local governments. This system helps to keep the balance between national unity and local interests. Each House of the Parliament has a presiding officer to ensure that debates and discussions are conducted in an orderly manner. In the Lok Sabha, the members elect a speaker, who conducts the sessions, allows members to speak, maintains discipline, and ensures that rules are followed. The Rajya Sabha is presided over by the Vice President of India, who acts as its chairperson. Fig. 6.6. Constitution Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 DON T MISS OUT The Sengol, a gold-plated, silver sceptre was symbolically handed over to Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, on 14 August 1947 on the occasion of Indian Independence as a powerful symbol to mark the transfer of power. It is now placed near the Speaker s chair in the new Lok Sabha, and served as a symbol of righteous and just rule. Dating back to the Chola period, the Sengol was handed to new rulers as a reminder that power must be guided by dharma and righteousness. At its top sits Nandi, symbolising justice. by a king or queen at as a symbol The  executive  responsibility of the Parliament (i.e., ensuring that laws are implemented and enforced) is as important as its  legislative  function (i.e., the making of laws). The Union Executive gives life to the legislative functions and power of the Parliament. The Union Executive consists of the following The Vice President, and The Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The Council of Ministers is chosen from among the MPs of both houses of Parliament. These ministers are collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. To help make Parliamentary discussions accessible to all, translation services are provided in multiple Indian languages. Previously, simultaneous interpretation was available in 12 languages, namely, Hindi, English, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, Punjabi and Telugu. Recently, six more languages were added: Bodo, Dogri, Maithili, Manipuri, Urdu, and Sanskrit. More languages are expected to be added in the future. Fig. 6.7. The Sengol Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Let us now discuss the Legislative and Executive functions of the Legislative Functions of The Constitution lays down the key functions that the Parliament needs to fulfil. They can be broadly classified under the following We explore them briefly in the sections below. 1) Constitutional function From your previous lessons on the theme of Democracy and Governance, name a few Constitutional functions of the Parliament. Did you list the election of President and Vice President? What about amendments to the Constitution? Indeed, these are vital constitutional functions of the Parliament. There are other important functions that we will explore in higher grades. The Parliament is directly entrusted with upholding the core values of the Indian Constitution, including: Enabling parliamentary democracy through universal adult Following the separation of powers between the legislature, executive, and judiciary, Ensuring federalism, and Upholding Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy by framing laws and policies. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Among the primary responsibilities of the legislature is to make laws. The Constitution has laid out an elaborate and rigorous process for lawmaking. A law is generally brought into force through an instrument called an act. A bill, which is a draft of a proposed law, is introduced in Parliament and goes through a long and effortful journey before it becomes an act. Given below is the journey of how a bill becomes an act, and ultimately a law, in the case of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE).  Most people call me RTE. I came into existence in August 2009, though the idea began almost a century before. My roots lie in the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Indian Constitution. Though the Constitution makers wanted me implemented within a decade after Independence, this didn t happen, leaving countless children without access to education. In the early 1990s, someone argued in court that I was inherently part of the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution, namely, the Right to Life   as education is important to lead a meaningful life. Parliamentary action began some years later with the introduction of the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2002, which mandated   as Article 21A of the Constitution   that the state shall provide free and compulsory education to all children between the ages of 6 and 14 years. Six years later, I was tabled as a bill in the Rajya Sabha. A committee studied me thoroughly and suggested modifications. The major debate concerned funding   new schools, infra- structure, and teachers for millions of children would be costly. By 2008, the MPs determined it was time. After the 2009 elections, the new government pursued the matter, and in August 2009, I was passed in the Lok Sabha and received the President s assent, becoming an Act. Today, I ve enabled the creation of legal pathways for children to attend school, facilitated new school construction, and ensured free books and uniforms for children.  A bill is a draft of a needs to be it can be Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive From bill to act   the process of lawmaking in the Parliament Reading: The origins are in the British Parliament. Many MPs were illiterate, so a clerk would read out the contents of the bill for the MPs to discuss. Today MPs read the bill before the discussions take place. Clause: These are parts of a bill that explain the specific details of the bill; eg. RTE defines the age group to which it applies (6 to 14 years). Gazette: This is an official government publication that announces legal documents and official information. either House of Vote on the Bill in other House Taken up for Note: All bills may not be referred to Committees. Fig. 6.8. Process of lawmaking   a simplified diagram to illustrate key steps. It is a MPs (the MPs tions and asks taken by the Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Draw a small chart to show the process of how RTE became an act. What do you think the process would be if RTE had been tabled in the Lok Sabha? DON T MISS OUT Some types of bills have to be tabled only in the Lok Sabha. One example is a  Money Bill  that is concerned with borrowing, etc.). It is essentially a draft law that can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha; however, the introduction of the bill requires the prior recommendation of the 3) Executive accountability The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are part of the Union Executive. They are: primarily responsible for implementing and enforcing laws and overseeing the effective running of the government; take decisions regarding the day-to-day functioning of the government based on the principles laid out in the Constitution and its laws; answerable to the Lok Sabha, through mechanisms like the Question Hour which require ministers to justify their actions and decisions. The Question Hour in the Lok Sabha is a select period (typically the first hour of a Parliamentary session) where MPs can ask the ministers questions about government policies and activities. It is a process of the Parliament that holds the Executive  accountable  (i.e., it must justify all actions and decisions). Special committees also hold meetings where ministries have to explain and answer questions about their policies. These committees may include MPs from different political parties. Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive The Parliament isn t always formal and serious. Sometimes, the atmosphere is set through poetry and humour! Example 1: Verse in the Parliament While presenting the Union Budget for the year 2025-26 on the 1st of February, 2025, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman recited the following verse from Tirukkural (an ancient Indian treatise in Tamil on ethics and morality): Vaanokki vaalum ulakellaam Mannavan koalnokki vaalung kudi. Just as living beings live expecting rains, Citizens live expecting good governance. On hearing this, there was an enthusiastic thumping of desks from the Treasury Benches. Example 2: Humour in the Parliament In 2011, during a spirited debate in the Lok Sabha, Parliamen- tarian Sushma Swaraj quoted a poetic verse to criticise the  Tu idhar udhar ki na baat kar, yeh bata ki kafila kyun luta, humein rahjano se gila nahi, teri rahbari ka sawal hai.  Don t change the topic, just say why the caravan was looted. We have no complaint with the robbers, but this is a question on In response, the then Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh calmly replied with another poetic line:  Maana ki teri deed ke qabil nahin hoon main, tu mera shauq dekh mera intezar dekh.  I admit that I am not worthy of your sight; you should look at my zeal and my perseverance. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Given here is an extract from the report of meetings between the Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and the officers from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Observe the screenshots above and discuss the following in small groups   Who is reporting to whom? What is the subject that has been reviewed? Identify the Committee s recommendation. What is the government s reply? Fig. 6.9. Extract from a report of the Standing Committee on Health and 1.2 Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centers (PHCs), Community Health Centers (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) 1.2.1 The Committee, at this juncture, notices that in some states and UTs, a separate Department of Ayush has not been opened. The Committee, to boost the Ayush system and for better recommends the Ministry of Ayush to impress upon and persuade the States and UTs with no separate department of Ayush to create such a department for speedy development and implementation of Ayush sector and schemes respectively. (Para 2.13 of the Report) 1.2.2 Public Health is being a state subject, creation of separate Department of Ayush in the States/UTs comes under purview. Ministry of Ayush has requested meetings to create separate Directorates, & DPMU in the States/UTs for speedy NAM scheme As on date, separate Ayush Directorate is available in 24 States/UTs. (SPMU=state project management unit; DPMU=district project management unit) (Para 2.23 of the Report) Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive 4) Financial accountability The Parliament approves and monitors government expenditure through the annual budget, and examining the distribution of funds to different ministries. Why do you think that Parliament keeps an eye on government expenditure? (Hint: Whose money does the The government is expected to provide the necessary information to Parliament in a timely and accurate manner. Executive Functions of Parliament We have uncovered a few points on the role of the executive in the previous sections. We look at this a little more closely now. DON T MISS OUT Part V of the Indian Constitution begins with Chapter I   The Executive. It looks at the roles and responsibilities of the President, Vice President, and Council of Ministers, among others. It is in Chapter II that the role and functions of Parliament are listed. Why might this be so? 1) The President The President is the Head of State and the nominal head of the Executive. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are responsible for running the government. The President appoints the Prime Minister and other ministers, summons the Parliament, and gives assent to bills, among other functions. The Council of Ministers aids and advises the President. However, in specific circumstances, the President can exercise discretionary powers, particularly during political crises, like when no party holds a clear majority in a Lok Sabha election. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 2) The Prime Minister and the Council The Prime Minister is the de facto executive authority in India s Parliamentary system. The President appoints the leader of the majority party or coalition in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister serves with the support of the majority of the MPs in the Lok Sabha. The Prime Minister s key functions include: Leading the Council of Advising the President Coordinating the work of Shaping national policies The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers take decisions and run the government. They are collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. Most of the bills that come to the Parliament for discussion are initiated by the government. A permanent group of officials   called  civil servants    help in implementing laws and policies. These officers, often called administrators or bureaucrats, work under the direction of ministers and ensure that government departments function smoothly. If the Executive is part of the Legislature, how do we say that there is separation of power? (Hint: revisit the section on DON T MISS OUT In 1956, Railway Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri resigned after a train accident. Although he was not blamed for the accident, he believed that a minister must take moral responsibility for anything that happens in their ministry. He offered his resignation to the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru; Nehru declined at first, but Shastri insisted. Finally, his resignation was accepted. Fig. 6.10. Lal Bahadur Shastri (Minister for Railways and later Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Differences Between the Legislature and the Executive It is important to understand some key differences between the Legislature and the Executive. The following table briefly summarises Composition The Parliament of India is the supreme legislative body of the country, composed of the President, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya The Executive is composed of the President, the Vice- President, and the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Making laws and overseeing the work of the Executive Enforcing the laws made by the Can introduce some bills in the Parliament Most of the bills are introduced by the Executive in the Keeps a check on the activities of the Executive by asking questions and seeking Provides information and explanations to the Legislature on its decisions and actions. Aids and advises the President on important matters, including calling sessions of Parliament. Prepares and implements the budget approved by Can function independently in day-to-day matters and may consult committees when Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 The Judiciary   Role of Checks The Judiciary is the branch of government that is responsible for interpreting and applying the laws of the land, including in specific cases of disputes. The Judiciary functions through a system of courts and plays a pivotal role in maintaining the democratic nature of society and governance. The Judiciary acts as the custodian of the Constitution, ensuring that all branches of the government operate within the principles and parameters enshrined in the Constitution. It keeps a check on the effective functioning of society and institutions of the government by interpreting laws, resolving disputes, and safeguarding The Constitution not only describes how the Legislature and Executive are given power to govern the country, but it also lists the specific responsibilities of these organs. To ensure that the powers of the Legislature are used properly and responsibilities are followed, the Judiciary is given the unique and critical responsibility of checking that the laws passed by Parliament have not violated the Constitutional framework. Similarly, if a violation of the Constitution occurs when the laws are implemented by the Executive, the Judiciary again has the power to step in. Just as the Parliament functions through its Legislature and the Executive arms, the Judiciary functions through its Courts. In this chapter, we have explored how the organs within the Parliament balance making of the law and executing it, and how the Judiciary checks these actions. These are all examples of the separation of powers and the system of checks and balances among the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary, ensuring that no one organ becomes too powerful. What might happen if one of the organs   Legislature, Executive, Judiciary   had all the power? How could it affect the rights of people? Discuss with your classmates Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive how each organ checks the others. For example, how does the Legislature question the actions of the Executive? How does the Judiciary make sure that laws and government actions respect the Constitution? Do you think there might be ways in which the actions of the Judiciary itself are Can you find examples where the Judiciary has asked lawmakers to review a law? Can you find any instances when the implementation of a law has been questioned by the Judiciary? We will learn more about the Judiciary in a later chapter. Legislative and Executive Functions at the State Level As discussed, the Union Government has a Parliament with legislative and executive functions. Similarly, each state has its own legislature and executive, called its  State Assembly. Just as the Parliament has Members of Parliament (MPs) who make laws, there are Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) who formulate laws on subjects that are on the  State List  and on the Union List, State List, and Concurrent The Constitution has lists that help to clarify the areas on which the Union and State governments can exclusively legislate, called the Union List and the State List, respectively. There is also a Concurrent List that has subjects on which both the Union and State governments can legislate. However, in the case that the Union government legislates on a subject in the Concurrent List, the state government is bound to follow it. In the case of RTE, for example, the Act is applicable all over India even though education is in the Concurrent List. Specific matters, like edXcatiRn and enYirRnmental pRlic\, reTXire cRllabRratiRn betZeen the XniRn and states, e[hibiting the interdependent natXre RI Iederalism. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 The President of India elected by an electoral Governor of the State by the President The nominal head is the President, but the Prime Minister is the de facto executive authority at the The nominal head is the Governor, but the Chief Minister is the de facto executive authority of the Leader of majority party/ coalition in Lok Sabha Leader of majority party/ coalition in Vidhan Sabha Selected by Prime Selected by Chief Minister to Lok Sabha Collectively responsible to Bicameral - Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Can be unicameral (Vidhan Sabha only) or bicameral (Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan Lok Sabha (House of the Vidhan Sabha (Legislative Rajya Sabha (Council of Vidhan Parishad (Legislative Council) - in some states only Term of Lower Makes laws on subjects in Union List and Makes laws on subjects in State List and Concurrent List Money bills originate only in Lok Sabha Money bills originate only in Parallel Structure of Union and State Governments in India The structure at the state-level imitates the one at the union-level. You can see this structure across both levels in the table: Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Structure of State Legislatures Unlike the Centre, the State legislatures can be  unicameral  (having only one house) or  bicameral  (having two houses). The legislative assembly is called the Vidhan Sabha, and the legislative council (the upper house) is called the Vidhan Parishad. The states having a bicameral system are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh, while the remaining states have a unicameral system. What type of legislature does your state have? Challenges to the Effective Functioning of the Legislatures As discussed, the Indian legislature (including the Parliament at the Centre and the State Assemblies) has the critical and vital role of enacting laws, overseeing administrative processes, and approving the budget. It also provides a platform for discussing national policies, development plans, international relations, and addressing public grievances. However, the legislature also faces several challenges in its effective functioning. Fig. 6.12. Vidhana Soudha houses the legislature in Karnataka. This building was envisioned by Kengal Hanumanthaiah, who was a freedom fighter and a member of the Constituent Assembly, Chief Minister of Karnataka, and later a Member of Parliament. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Read the following statement of the former chairman of the Rajya Sabha, M. Venkaiah Naidu given in 2021:...the productivity of Rajya Sabha during 2004-14 has been about 78% and it declined to about 65% since then. Of the 11 sessions [that he presided over], four of them clocked low productivity of 6.80%, 27.30%, 28.90% and 29.55%; during the year 2018, the Rajya Sabha recorded the lowest ever productivity of 35.75% under the impact of disruptions.  What conclusions can you draw from this statement? What implications does this have for the role that the Rajya Sabha is expected to play? Some of these can include regular absenteeism of members, non- cooperative conduct or communication of members, reduced quality of important debates, and disruptions of the Question The Parliament typically meets three times a year. These meetings are called  sessions    Budget Sessions, Monsoon Sessions and Winter Sessions. Each of these has  sittings, where the Parliament meets to deliberate upon proposed laws, discuss important matters of governance, and seek explanations from the Executive on its decisions and actions. Usually, the Parliament sits for 6 hours a day during sessions. This can be extended on special occasions or when there is a need to complete urgent business. The State Assemblies too, have similar schedules. Study the data given in the following table. What conclusions can you draw about the functioning of Parliament over time? Compile data for more recent years. Period of Lok Sabha 1st Lok Sabha (1952-1957) 2nd Lok Sabha (1957-1962) 10th Lok Sabha (1991-1996) 13th Lok Sabha (1999-2004) the number of the Lok Sabha time it was Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive The Parliament and the State Assemblies have been envisioned as spaces for thoughtful debates and discussions where laws are made in the interest of the people. However, when debates are disrupted, sessions are cut short and some bills take years to be discussed and passed, it becomes a matter of concern. Take up a small group project. Compile data regarding the functioning of the legislature in your state or union Seek an appointment with an MLA and gather information about challenges with respect to the state legislature. Concerns have been expressed by sections of the society about the fact that a substantial proportion of their representatives in the Lok Sabha have criminal cases against them, and that many sessions are marked by angry or biased debates that do not seriously address issues affecting the people. The media also plays an important role in communicating the concerns of the electorate. These cartoons express them with humour, a practice common to all healthy democracies. Fig. 6.13.a. Monsoon Session: Expect, lightning, storms, breaches etc. It s Monsoon Session. Fig. 6.13.b. Scrutiny of papers filed Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Yet, our democracy grows stronger when citizens stay informed and engaged. By asking questions, sharing their views, and participating in public discussions, people help shape better policies. Therefore, one of the best ways to overcome the challenges India faces regarding its legislature, is to ensure that many more citizens stay informed on matters of importance to society, participate in discussions through public debate on digital spaces that various government departments offer during policymaking processes, and constructively engaging with political representatives on policies. Many more young leaders and diverse voices are entering public life, and technology is making it easier to stay connected and involved with governance. As future voters, your choices, and participation will play a key role in strengthening our Parliament and the assembly of the state you belong to, ensuring that they truly serve all people. DON T MISS OUT Atal Bihari Vajpayee, a former Prime Minister of India, said during a speech in the Lok Sabha, Lekin yeh desh rehna is desh ka loktantra amar rehna chaahiye.  (Governments will come and go, parties will rise and fall. But the nation must endure, and its democracy must live on.) What message do you think this gives about the role of Parliament and leaders in a democracy? Why is it important to protect democratic values even when political power changes? Fig. 6.14. Atal Bihari Vajpayee Governance and Democracy 6   The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Before we move on... India s Parliamentary system ensures that power is shared, decisions are debated, and leaders are held accountable. The Legislature makes laws, the Executive implements them, and the Judiciary ensures that they follow the The Parliament represents the voice of the people and reflects the federal spirit of our democracy. Both at the Centre and in the states, structures are designed to balance representation, responsibility, and Checks and balances between institutions help protect citizens  rights and uphold democratic values. The functioning of the Parliament needs to become more efficient and productive so that the country s progress is Questions and activities 1. Find out how many representatives from your state are in each House of the Parliament. 2. What makes the Indian Parliament the  voice of the people ? How does it ensure that different opinions are 3. Why do you think the Constitution made the Executive responsible to the Legislature? 4. Why do you think we have chosen the system of bicameral legislature at the Union level? 5. Try to track the journey of a recent bill passed by the Parliament. Identify in which House it was introduced. Were there any major debates or disagreements? How long did it take for the bill to become a law? Use newspaper archives, government websites, and Lok Sabha debates, or ask your teacher for help. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 6. Choose a recent law passed by the Parliament. Divide into teams to role-play different parts of the process   MPs debating in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, ministers answering questions, and the President giving assent. Present a short skit showing how a bill becomes a law; enact a  model Parliament. 7. The Women s Reservation Bill, 2023, was passed with wide support. Why might it have taken over 25 years for this bill to be passed, despite being discussed for so long? 8. Sometimes the Parliament is disrupted and does not function for the number of days it is supposed to. What impact do you think this has on the quality of laws and the trust people place in their representatives? 9. Can you create  interest  groups among students and list questions related to any policy that you may want to ask your MP and / or your MLA? How would these questions be different if it is to the MP instead of the MLA, and vice 10.What is the role that the Judiciary plays in Indian democracy? What could happen if we didn t have an


=== Class9_Polity ===

What is democracy? What are its features? This chapter builds on a simple definition of democracy. Step by step, we work out the meaning of the terms involved in this definition. The aim here is to understand clearly the bare minimum features of a democratic form of government. After going through this chapter we should be able to distinguish a democratic form of government from a non-democratic government. Towards the end of this chapter, we step beyond this minimal objective and introduce a broader idea of democracy. Democracy is the most prevalent form of government in the world today and it is expanding to more countries. But why is it so? What makes it better than other forms of government? That is the second big question that we take up in this chapter. I have heard a Democracy is off the people, far (from) the people and (where they) buy the people. Why don t we WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? But we don t know if this is the best way of defining unless we think about it ourselves. We must not accept something just because it is famous, just because everyone accepts it. Yolanda: Ma am, can I suggest something? We don t need to look for any definition. I read somewhere that the word democracy comes from a Greek word  Demokratia. In Greek  demos  means people and  kratia  means rule. So democracy is rule by the people. This is the correct meaning. Where is the need to debate? Lyngdoh Madam: That is also a very helpful way of thinking about this matter. I would just say that this does not always work. A word does not remain tied to its origin. Just think of computers. Originally they were used for computing, that is to say calculating, very difficult mathematical sums. These were very powerful calculators. But nowa- days very few people use computers for comput- ing sums. They use it for writing, for designing, for listening to music and for watching films. Words remain the same but their meaning can change with time. In that case it is not very useful to look at the origins of a word. Merry: Ma am, so basically what you are saying is that there is no shortcut to our thinking about the matter ourselves. We have to think about its meaning and evolve a definition. Lyngdoh Madam: You got me right. Let us get on with it now. A C T I V I T Y Let us take Lyngdoh Madam seriously and try to write down the exact definition of some of the simple words that we use all the time: pen, rain and love. For example, is there a way of defining a pen that distinguishes it clearly from a pencil, a brush, a chalk or crayon. < What have you learnt from this attempt? < What does it teach us about understanding the meaning of democracy? A simple definition A simple definition A simple definition A simple definition A simple definition Let us get back to our discussion on similarities and differences among governments that are called You have already read about different forms of government. On the basis of your understanding of democracy so far, mentioning a few examples write down some common features of: < Democratic governments < Non-democratic governments Why define democracy? Why define democracy? Why define democracy? Why define democracy? Why define democracy? Before we proceed further, let us first take note of an objection by Merry. She does not like this way of defining democracy and wants to ask some basic questions. Her teacher Matilda Lyngdoh responds to her questions, as other classmates join the discussion: Merry: Ma am, I don t like this idea. First we spend time discussing democracy and then we want to find out the meaning of democracy. I mean logically shouldn t we have approached it the other way round? Shouldn t the meaning have come first and then the example? Lyngdoh Madam: I can see your point. But that is not how we reason in everyday life. We use words like pen, rain or love. Do we wait to have a definition of these words before we use them? Come to think of it, do we have clear definition of these words? It is only by using a word that we understand its meaning. Merry: But then why do we need definitions at all? Lyngdoh Madam: We need a definition only when we come across a difficulty in the use of a word. We need a definition of rain only when we wish to distinguish it from, say, drizzle or cloudburst. The same is true for democracy. We need a clear definition only because people use it for different purposes, because very different kinds of gov- ernments call themselves democracy. Ribiang: But why do we need to work on a defini- tion? The other day you quoted Abraham Lincoln to us:  Democracy is government of the people, by the people and for the people. We in Meghalaya always ruled ourselves. That is accepted by everyone. Why do we need to Lyngdoh Madam: I am not saying we need to change it. I too find this definition very beautiful. WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? Ribiang went back home and collected some more famous quotations on democracy. This time she did not mention the names of the people who said or wrote these. She wants you to read these and comment on how good or useful these thoughts are: < Democracy gives every man the right to be his own oppressor. < Democracy consists of choosing your dictators after they ve told you what you think it is you want < Man s capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man s inclination to injustice makes < Democracy is a device that insures we shall be governed no better than we deserve. < All the ills of democracy can be cured by more democracy. democracies. One simple factor common to all democracies is: the government is chosen by the people. We could thus start with a simple definition: democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. This is a useful starting point. This definition allows us to separate democracy from forms of government that are clearly not democratic. The army rulers of Myanmar were not elected by the people. Those who happened to be in control of the army became the rulers of the country. People had no say in this decision. Dictators like Pinochet (Chile) are not elected by the people. This also applies to monarchies. The kings of Saudi Arabia rule not because the people have chosen them to do so but because they happen to be born into the royal family. This simple definition is not adequate. It reminds us that democracy is people s rule. But if we use this definition in an unthinking manner, we would end up calling almost every government that holds an election a democracy. That would be very misleading. As we shall find out in Chapter 3, every government in contemporary world wants to be called a democracy, even if it is not so. That is why we need to carefully distinguish between a government that is a democracy and one that pretends to be one. We can do so by understanding each word in this definition carefully and spelling out the features of a democratic This cartoon was drawn when elections were held in Iraq with the presence of US and other foreign powers. What do you think this cartoon is saying? Why is the way it is?  Stephane Peray, Thailand, Cagle Cartoons Inc. want in a democracy? Or must a democratic government function with some limits? Is it necessary for a democracy to respect some rights of the citizens? Let us consider each of these questions with the help of some Major decisions by elected Major decisions by elected Major decisions by elected Major decisions by elected Major decisions by elected In Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf led a military coup in October 1999. He overthrew a democratically elected government and declared himself the  Chief Executive  of the country. Later he changed his designation to President and in 2002 held a referendum in the country that granted him a five- year extension. Pakistani media, human rights organisations and democracy activists said that the 1.2 FEATURES OF DEMOCRACY Syria is a small west Asian country. The ruling Ba ath Party and some of its small allies are the only parties allowed in that country. Do you think this cartoon could apply to China or Mexico? What does the crown of leaves  Emad Hajjaj, Jordan, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 7 June 2005 We have started with a simple definition that democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. This raises many questions: < Who are the rulers in this definition? Which officials must be elected for any government to be called a democracy? Which decisions may be taken by non- elected officials in a democracy? < What kind of election constitutes a democratic election? What conditions must be fulfilled for an < Who are the people who can elect the rulers or get elected as rulers? Should this include every citizen on an equal basis? Can a democracy deny some citizens this right? < Finally, what kind of a form of government is democracy? Can elected rulers do whatever they malpractices and fraud. In August 2002 he issued a  Legal Framework Constitution of Pakistan. According to this Order, the President can dismiss the national and provincial assemblies. The work of the civilian cabinet is supervised by a National dominated by military officers. After passing this law, elections were held to the national and provincial assemblies. So Pakistan has had elections, elected representatives have some powers. But the final power rested with military officers and General Musharraf himself. Clearly, there are many reasons why Pakistan under General Musharraf should not be called a democracy. But let us focus on one of these. Can we say that the rulers are elected by the people in Pakistan? Not quite. People may have elected their representatives to the national and provincial assemblies but those elected representatives were not really the rulers. They cannot take the final decisions. The power to take final decision rested with army officials and with General Musharraf, and none of them were elected by the people. This happens in many dictatorships and monarchies. They formally have an elected parliament and government but the real power is with those who are not elected. In a few countries, the real power was with some external powers and representatives. This cannot be called people s rule. This gives us the first feature. In a democracy the final decision- making power must rest with those elected by the people. Free and fair electoral Free and fair electoral Free and fair electoral Free and fair electoral Free and fair electoral In China, elections are regularly held after every five years for electing the country s parliament, called Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui (National People s Congress). The National People s Congress has the power to appoint the President of the country. It has nearly 3,000 members elected from all over China. Some members are elected by the army. Before contesting elections, a candidate needs the approval of the Chinese Communist Party. Only those who are members of the Chinese Communist Party or eight smaller parties allied to it were allowed to contest elections held in 2002-03. The government is always formed by the Communist Party. Since its independence in 1930, Mexico holds elections after every six years to elect its President. The country has never been under a military or dictator s rule. But until 2000 every election was won by a This cartoon was drawn in the context of Latin America. Do you think it applies to the Pakistani situation as well? Think of other countries where this could apply? Does this happen sometimes in our country as well? WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY?  Ares, Caglecartoon.com, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 22 January 2005 All this is so remote for me. Is about rulers and we talk about a classroom? Or a party called PRI (Institutional Revolutionary Party). Opposition parties did contest elections, but never managed to win. The PRI was known to use many dirty tricks to win elections. All those who were employed in government offices had to attend its party meetings. Teachers of government schools used to force parents to vote for the PRI. Media largely ignored the activities of opposition political parties except to criticise them. Sometimes the polling booths were shifted from one place to another in the last minute, which made it difficult for people to cast their votes. The PRI spent a large sum of money in the campaign for its candidates. Should we consider the elections described above as examples of people electing their rulers? Reading these examples we get a sense that we cannot. There are many problems here. In China the elections do not offer the people any serious choice. They have to choose the ruling party and the candidates approved by it. Can we call this a choice? In the Mexican example, people seemed to really have a choice but in practice they had no choice. There was no way the ruling party could be defeated, even if people were against it. These are not fair elections. We can thus add a second feature to our understanding of democracy. Holding elections of any kind is not sufficient. The elections must offer a real choice between political alternatives. And it should be possible for people to use this choice to remove the existing rulers, if they wish so. So, a democracy must be based on a free and fair election where those currently in power have a fair chance of losing. We shall find out more about a democratic election in Chapter 3. One person, one v Earlier, we read about how the struggle for democracy was linked to the demand for universal adult franchise. This principle has now come to be accepted almost all over the world. Yet there are many instances of denial of equal right to vote. < Until 2015, in Saudi Arabia women did not have the right to vote. < Estonia has made its citizenship rules in such a way that people belonging to Russian minority find it difficult to get the right to < In Fiji, the electoral system is such that the vote of an indigenous Fiji has more value than that of an Indian-Fijian. Democracy is based on a fundamental principle of political equality. That gives us the third feature of democracy: democracy, each adult citizen must have one vote and each vote must have one value. We shall read more about it in Chapter 3. This cartoon was Democracy  and was first published in a publication. What do here? Could this cartoon be applied to  Nerilicon, El Economista, Mexico, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 17 May 2005 WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? This cartoon is about the Iraqi election held Hussein s regime was overthrown. He is shown behind the bars. What is the here? Compare the message of this cartoon with the first cartoon in this Rule of la ule of la ule of la ule of la ule of law and r w and r w and r w and r w and respe Zimbabwe attained independence from White minority rule in 1980. Since then the country has been ruled by ZANU-PF, the party that led the freedom struggle. Its leader, Robert Mugabe, ruled the country since independence. Elections were held regularly and always won by ZANU-PF. President Mugabe was popular but also used unfair practices in elections. Over the years his government changed the constitution several times to increase the powers of the President and make him less accountable. Opposition party workers were harassed and their meeting disrupted. Public protests and demonstrations against the government were declared illegal. There was a law that limited the right to criticise the President. Television and radio were controlled by the government and gave only the ruling party s version. There were independent newspapers but the journalists who went against it. The government ignored some court judgments that went against it and pressurised judges. He was forced out of office in 2017. The example of Zimbabwe shows that popular approval of the rulers is necessary in a democracy, but it is not sufficient. Popular governments can be undemocratic. Popular leaders can be autocratic. If we wish to assess a democracy, it is important to look at the elections. But it is equally important to look before and after the elections. There should be sufficient room for normal political activity, including political opposition, in the period before elections. This requires that the state should respect some basic rights of the citizen. They should be free to think, to have opinions, to express these in public, to form associations, to protest and take other political actions. Everyone should be equal in the eyes of law. These rights must be protected by an independent Why talk about Zimbabwe? I read similar reports from many parts of our own country. Why don t we discuss  John Trever, Albuquerque Journal, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc. judiciary whose orders are obeyed by everyone. We shall read more about these rights in Chapter 5. Similarly, there are some conditions that apply to the way a government is run after the elections. A democratic government cannot do whatever it likes, simply because it has won an election. It has to respect some basic rules. In particular it has to respect some guarantees to the minorities. Every major decision has consultations. Every office bearer has certain rights and responsibilities assigned by the constitution and the law. Each of these is accountable not only to the people but also to other independent officials. We shall read more about this in Chapter 4. Both these aspects give us the fourth and final feature of democracy: a democratic government rules within limits set by constitutional law and citizens  rights. Let us sum up the discussion so far. We started with a simple definition that democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. We found that this definition was not adequate unless we explained some of the key words used in it. Through a series of examples we worked out four features of democracy as a form of government. Accordingly, democracy is a form of government in which: < Rulers elected by the people take all the major decisions; < Elections offer a choice and fair opportunity to the people to change the current rulers; < This choice and opportunity is available to all the people on an equal basis; and < The exercise of this choice leads to a government limited by basic rules of the constitution and blocked free flow of information on the internet by placing restrictions on popular websites like  Google  and  Yahoo. The image of tanks and an reminds the reader of another major event in history. Find out about  Eric Allie, Pioneer Press, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 27 February 2006 WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? Read these five examples of working or denial of democracy. Match each of these with the relevant feature of democracy discussed above. King of Bhutan has declared that in future he will be guided by the advice given to him by elected representatives. Many Tamil workers who migrated from India were not given a right to vote in Sri Lanka. The king imposed a ban on political gatherings, demonstrations and rallies. The Indian Supreme Court held that the dissolution of Bihar assembly was unconstitutional. Political parties in Bangladesh have agreed that a neutral government should rule the country at the time of elections. 1.3 WHY DEMOCRACY? An argument broke out in Madam Lyngdoh s class. She had finished teaching the previous section on what is democracy and asked the students if they thought democracy was the best form of government. Everyone had something to say. Debating merits of Debating merits of Debating merits of Debating merits of Debating merits of Yolanda: We live in a democratic country. All over the world people want democracy. Countries that were not democratic earlier are becoming demo- cratic now. All great people have said nice things about democracy. Isn t it obvious that democracy is the best? Do we need to debate this? Tangkini: But Lyngdoh Madam had said we should not accept something just because it is famous, just because everyone else accepts it. Isn t it possible that everyone is following a wrong Jeni: Yes, it actually is a wrong path. What has democracy brought to our country? Seven decades of democracy and there is so much poverty in the country. Ribiang: But what has democracy got to do with it? Do we have poverty because we are demo- cratic or do we have poverty despite being a Jeni: Whatever, how does it make a difference? The point is that this can t be the best form of government. Democracy is all about chaos, in- stability, corruption and hypocrisy. Politicians fight among themselves. Who cares for the coun- Poimon: So, what should we have instead? Go back to the British rule? Invite some kings to rule this country? Rose: I don t know. I think what this country needs is a strong leader, someone who does not have to bother about elections and parliament. One leader should have all the powers. He should be able to do whatever is needed in country s interest. That alone can remove corruption and poverty from this country. Someone shouted: That is called dictatorship! Hoi: What if that person starts using all these pow- ers for himself and his family? What if he is Rose: I am speaking only of the honest, sincere and strong leader. Hoi: But that is not fair. You are comparing a real democracy with an ideal dictatorship. We should compare an ideal with an ideal, the real with the real. Go and check the record of dictators in real life. They are most corrupt, self- ish and brutal. It is just that we don t get to know about this. And what is worse, you can t even get rid of them. I want to be in class! That sounds like a democratic Rule of law Respect for Rights One person one vote Free and fair Major decisions by Madam Lyngdoh was listening to this discussion with interest. Now she stepped in:  I was delighted to see you all arguing so passionately. I don t know who is right and who is wrong. That is for you to settle. But I did feel that you all wanted to speak your mind. You may have felt very bad if someone tried to stop you or if someone punished you for saying what you felt. Would you be able to do that in a country that is not democratic? Is that a good argument for democracy?  Arguments against democracy Arguments against democracy Arguments against democracy Arguments against democracy Arguments against democracy This conversation has most of the arguments that we routinely hear against democracy. Let us go over some of these arguments: < Leaders keep changing in a democracy. This leads to instability. < Democracy is all about political competition and power play. There is no scope for morality. < So many people have to be consulted in a democracy that it leads to delays. < Elected leaders do not know the best interest of the people. It leads to bad decisions. < Democracy leads to corruption for it is based on electoral competition. < Ordinary people don t know what is good for them; they should not Are there some other arguments against democracy that you can think of? Which of these arguments applies mainly to democracy? Which of these can apply to misuse of any form of government? Which of these do you agree with? Clearly, democracy is not a magical solution for all the problems. It has not ended poverty in our country and in other parts of the world. Democracy as a form of government only ensures that people take their own decisions. This does not guarantee that their decisions will be good. People can make mistakes. Involving the people in these decisions does lead to delays in decision making. It is also true that democracy leads to frequent changes in leadership. Sometimes this can set back big decisions and affect the These arguments show that democracy of the kind we see may not be the ideal form of government. But that is not a question we face in real life. The real question we face is different: is democracy better than other forms of government that are there for us to choose from? Arguments for democracy Arguments for democracy Arguments for democracy Arguments for democracy Arguments for democracy China s famine of 1958-1961 was the worst recorded famine in world history. Nearly three crore people died in this famine. During those days, India s economic condition was not much better than China. Yet India did not have a famine of the kind China had. Economists think This cartoon is from Brazil, a country that has long experience of dictatorship.  It is entitled  The Hidden Side of Dictatorship. Which hidden sides does this cartoon depict? Is it necessary for every dictatorship to have a hidden side? If possible, find this out about the dictators including Pinochet in Chile, Jaruzelski in Poland, Sani Abacha in Nigeria and Ferdinand Marcos in  Osmani Simanca, Brazil, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 6 December 2004 that this was a result of different government policies in the two democracy in India made the Indian government respond to food scarcity in a way that the Chinese government did not. They point out that no large-scale famine has ever taken place in an independent and democratic country. If China too had multiparty elections, an opposition party and a press free to criticise the government, then so many people may not have died in the famine. This example brings out one of the reasons why democracy is considered the best form of government. Democracy is better than any other form of government in responding to the needs of the people. A non- democratic government may and can respond to the people s needs, but it all depends on the wishes of the people who rule. If the rulers don t want to, they don t have to act according to the wishes of the people. A democracy requires that the rulers have to attend to the needs of the people. A democratic government is a better government because it is a There is another reason why democracy should lead to better decisions than any non-democratic government. Democracy is based on consultation and discussion. A democratic decision always involves many persons, discussions and meetings. When a number of people put their heads together, they are able to point out possible mistakes in any decision. This takes time. But there is a big advantage in taking time over important decisions. This reduces the chances of rash or irresponsible decisions. Thus democracy improves the quality This is related to the third argument. Democracy provides a method to deal with differences and conflicts. In any society people are bound to have differences of opinions and interests. These differences are particularly sharp in a country like ours which has an amazing social diversity. People belong to different regions, speak different languages, practise different religions and have different castes. They look at the world very differently and have different preferences. The preferences of one group can clash with those of other groups. How do we resolve such a conflict? The conflict can be solved by brutal power. Whichever group is more powerful will dictate its terms and others will have to accept that. But that would lead to resentment and unhappiness. Different groups may not be able to live together for long in such a way. Democracy provides the only peaceful solution to this problem. In democracy, no one is a permanent winner. No one is a permanent loser. Different groups can live with one another peacefully. In a diverse country like India, democracy keeps our country together. These three arguments were about the effects of democracy on the quality of government and social life. But the strongest argument for democracy is not about what democracy does to the government. It is about what democracy does to the citizens. Even if democracy does not bring about better decisions and accountable government, it is still better than other forms of government. Democracy enhances the dignity of citizens. As we discussed above, democracy is based on the principle of political equality, on recognising that the What would have happened if India was not a Could we have stayed together as a single nation? WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? poorest and the least educated has the same status as the rich and the educated. People are not subjects of a ruler, they are the rulers themselves. Even when they make mistakes, they are responsible for Finally, democracy is better than other forms of government because it allows us to correct its own mistakes. As we saw above, there is no guarantee that mistakes cannot be made in democracy. No form of government can guarantee that. The advantage in a democracy is that such mistakes cannot be hidden for long. There is a space for public discussion on these mistakes. And there is a room for correction. Either the rulers have to change their decisions, or the rulers can be changed. This cannot happen in a Let us sum it up. Democracy cannot get us everything and is not the solution to all problems. But it is clearly better than any other alternative that we know. It offers better chances of a good decision, it is likely to respect people s own wishes and allows different kinds of people to live together. Even when it fails to do some of these things, it allows a way of correcting its mistakes and offers more dignity to all citizens. That is why democracy is considered the best form of This cartoon was published in Canada just before its elections of 2004. expected the Liberal party to win once again. When the results came, the Liberal Party lost the elections. Is this cartoon an argument against democracy or Rajesh and Muzaffar read an article. It showed that no democracy has ever gone to war with another democracy. Wars take place only when one of the two governments is non-democratic. The article said that this was a great merit of democracy. After reading the essay, Rajesh and Muzaffar had different reactions. Rajesh said that this was not a good argument for democracy. It was just a matter of chance. It is possible that in future democracies may have wars. Muzaffar said that it could not be a matter of chance. Democracies take decisions in such a way that it reduces the chances of war. Which of the two positions do you agree with and why?  Cam Cardow, The Ottawa Citizen, Canada, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 30 May 2004. 1.4 BROADER MEANINGS OF DEMOCRACY In this chapter we have considered the meaning of democracy in a limited and descriptive sense. We have understood democracy as a form of government. This way of defining democracy helps us to identify a clear set of minimal features that a democracy must have. The most common form that democracy takes in our times is that of a representative democracy. You have already read about this in the previous classes. In the countries we call democracy, all the people do not rule. A majority is allowed to take decisions on behalf of all the people. Even the majority does not rule directly. The majority of people rule through their elected representatives. This become necessary because: < Modern democracies involve such a large number of people that it is physically impossible for them to sit together and take a collective < Even if they could, the citizen does not have the time, the desire or the skills to take part in all the This gives us a clear but minimal understanding of democracy. This clarity helps us to distinguish democracies from non-democracies. But it does not allow us to distinguish between a democracy and a good democracy. It does not WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? This famous cartoon by R K Laxman comments on the celebrations of the fifty years of many images on the wall do you recognize? Do many common people feel the way the common man in this  R.K. Laxman, The Times of India allow us to see the operation of democracy beyond government. For this we need to turn to broader meanings of democracy. Sometimes we use democracy for organisations other than the government. Just read these <  We are a very democratic family. Whenever a decision has to be taken, we all sit down and arrive at a consensus. My opinion matters as much as my father s.  <  I don t like teachers who do not allow students to speak and ask questions in the class. I would like to have teachers with democratic temperament.  <  One leader and his family members decide everything in this party. How can they talk of democracy?  These ways of using the word democracy go back to its basic sense of a method of taking decisions. A democratic decision involves consultation with and consent of all those who are affected by that decision. Those who are not powerful have the same say in taking the decision as those who are powerful. This can apply to a government or a family or any other organisation. Thus democracy is also a principle that can be applied to any sphere of life. Sometimes we use the word democracy not to describe any existing government but to set up democracies must aim to become: <  True democracy will come to this country only when no one goes hungry <  In a democracy every citizen must be able to play equal role in decision making. For this you don t need just an equal right to vote. Every citizen needs to have equal information, basic education, equal resources and a lot of If we take these ideals seriously, then no country in the world is a democracy. Yet an understanding of democracy as an ideal reminds us of why we value democracy. It enables us to judge an existing weaknesses. It helps us to distinguish between a minimal democracy and a good democracy. In this book we do not deal much with this expanded notion of democracy. Our focus here is with some core institutional features of democracy as a form of government. Next year you will read more about a democratic society and ways of evaluating our democracy. At this stage we just need to note that democracy can apply to many spheres of life and that democracy can take many forms. There can be various ways of taking decisions in a democratic manner, as long as the basic principle of consultation on an equal basis is accepted. The most common form of democracy in today s world is rule through people s elected representatives. We shall read more about that in Chapter 3. But if the community is small, there can be other ways of taking democratic decisions. All the people can sit together and take decisions directly. This is how Gram Sabha should work in a village. Can you think of some other democratic ways of decision making? A C T I V I T Y Find out the total number of eligible voters in your assembly constituency and your parliamentary constituency. Find out how many people can fit into the largest stadium in your area. Is it possible for all the voters in your parliamentary or assembly constituency to sit together and have a meaningful In my village the Gram Sabha never meets. Is that WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write  democratic,  undemocratic  or  not sure  against each of these. a Country A: People who do not accept the country s official religion do not have a right to vote. b Country B: The same party has been winning elections for the last c Country C: Ruling party has lost in the last three elections. d Country D: There is no independent election commission. Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write  democratic,  undemocratic  or  not sure  against each of these. a Country P: The parliament cannot pass a law about the army without the consent of the Chief of Army. b Country Q: The parliament cannot pass a law reducing the powers of the judiciary. c Country R: The country s leaders cannot sign any treaty with another country without taking permission from its neighbouring d Country S: All the major economic decisions about the country are taken by officials of the central bank which the ministers cannot Which of these is not a good argument in favour of democracy? Why? a People feel free and equal in a democracy. b Democracies resolve conflict in a better way than others. c Democratic government is more accountable to the people. d Democracies are more prosperous than others. This also means that no country is a perfect democracy. The features of democracy that we discussed in this chapter provide only the democracy. That does not make it democracy has to try to realise the ideals of a democratic decision- making. This cannot be achieved once and for all. This requires a constant effort to save and strengthen democratic forms of decision-making. What we do as citizens can make a difference to making our country more or less democratic. This is the strength and the weakness of democracy: the fate of the country depends not just on what the rulers do, but mainly on what we, as citizens, do. This is what distinguished democracy from other governments. Other forms of government like monarchy, dictatorship or one-party rule do not require all citizens to take part in politics. In fact most would like citizens not to take part in politics. But democracy depends on active political participation by all the citizens. That is why a study of democracy must focus on Each of these statements contains a democratic and an undemocratic element. Write out the two separately for each statement. a A minister said that some laws have to be passed by the parliament in order to conform to the regulations decided by the World Trade b The Election Commission ordered re-polling in a constituency where large-scale rigging was reported. c Women s representation in the parliament has barely reached 10 per cent. This led women s organisations to demand one-third seats Which of these is not a valid reason for arguing that there is a lesser possibility of famine in a democratic country? a Opposition parties can draw attention to hunger and starvation. b Free press can report suffering from famine in different parts of c Government fears its defeat in the next elections. d People are free to believe in and practise any religion. There are 40 villages in a district where the government has made no provision for drinking water. These villagers met and considered many methods of forcing the government to respond to their need. Which of these is not a democratic method? a Filing a case in the courts claiming that water is part of right to life. b Boycotting the next elections to give a message to all parties. c Organising public meetings against government s policies. d Paying money to government officials to get water. Write a response to the following arguments against democracy: a Army is the most disciplined and corruption-free organisation in the country. Therefore army should rule the country. b Rule of the majority means the rule of ignorant people. What we need is the rule of the wise, even if they are in small numbers. c If we want religious leaders to guide us in spiritual matters, why not invite them to guide us in politics as well. The country should be ruled by religious leaders. Are the following statements in keeping with democracy as a a Father to daughter: I don t want to hear your opinion about your marriage. In our family children marry where the parents tell them b Teacher to student: Don t disturb my concentration by asking me questions in the classroom. c Employee to the officer: Our working hours must be reduced according to the law. Consider the following facts about a country and decide if you would call it a democracy. Give reasons to support your decision. a All the citizens of the country have right to vote. Elections are held b The country took loan from international agencies. One of the conditions for giving loan was that the government would reduce its expenses on education and health. c People speak more than seven languages but education is available only in one language, the language spoken by 52 percent people of that country. d Several organisations have given a call for peaceful demonstrations and nation wide strikes in the country to oppose these policies. Government has arrested these leaders. e The government owns the radio and television in the country. All the newspapers have to get permission from the government to publish any news about government s policies and protests. In 2004 a report published in USA pointed to the increasing inequalities in that country. Inequalities in income reflected in the participation of people in democracy. It also shaped their abilities to influence the decisions taken by the government. The report < If an average Black family earns $ 100 then the income of average White family is $ 162. A White family has twelve times more wealth than the average Black family. < In a President s election  nearly 9 out of 10 individuals in families with income over $ 75,000 have voted. These people are the top 20% of the population in terms of their income. On the other hand only 5 people out of 10 from families with income less than $ 15,000 have voted. They are the bottom 20% of the population in terms of their income. < About 95% contribution to the political parties comes from the rich. This gives them opportunity to express their opinions and concerns, which is not available to most citizens. < As poor sections participate less in politics, the government does not listen to their concerns   coming out of poverty, getting job, education, health care and housing for them. Politicians hear most regularly about the concerns of business persons and the rich. Write an essay on  Democracy and Poverty  using the information given in this report but using examples from India. Most newspapers have an editorial page. On that page the newspaper publishes its own opinions about current affairs. The paper also publishes the views of other writers and intellectuals and letters written by the readers. Follow any one newspaper for one month and collect editorials, articles and letters on that page that have anything to do with democracy. Classify these into the following categories: Constitutional and legal aspects of democracy Electoral and party politics Criticism of democracy WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? We noted in the previous chapter that in a democracy the rulers are not free to do what they like. There are certain basic rules that the citizens and the government have to follow. All such rules together are called constitution. As the supreme law of the country, the constitution determines the rights of citizens, the powers of the government and how the government In this chapter we ask some basic questions about the constitutional design of a democracy. Why do we need a constitution? How are the constitutions drawn up? Who designs them and in what way? What are the values that shape the constitutions in democratic states? Once a constitution is accepted, can we make changes later as required by the One recent instance of designing constitution for a democratic state is that of South Africa. We begin this chapter by looking at what happened there and how the South Africans went about this task of designing their constitution. Then we turn to how the Indian Constitution was made, what its foundational values are, and how it provides a good framework for the conduct of citizens  life and that of the government. 2.1 DEMOCRATIC CONSTITUTION IN  I have fought against white domination and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.  This was Nelson Mandela, being tried for treason by the white South African government. He and seven other leaders were sentenced to life imprisonment in 1964 for daring to oppose the apartheid regime in his country. He spent the next 27 years in South Africa s most dreaded prison, Robben Island. truggle against apar uggle against apar uggle against apar uggle against apar uggle against apartheid Apartheid was the name of a system of racial discrimination unique to South Africa. The white Europeans imposed this system on South Africa. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the trading companies from Europe occupied it with arms and force, in the way they occupied India. But unlike India, a large number of  whites  had settled in South Africa and became the local rulers. The system of apartheid divided the people and labelled them on the basis of their skin colour. The native people of South Africa are black in colour. They made up about three-fourth of the population and were called  blacks. Besides these two groups, there were people of mixed races who were called  coloured  and people who migrated from India. The white rulers treated all non- whites as inferiors. The non-whites did not have voting rights. The apartheid system was particularly oppressive for the blacks. They were forbidden from living in white areas. They could work in white areas only if they had a permit. Trains, buses, taxis, hotels, hospitals, schools and colleges, libraries, cinema halls, theatres, beaches, swimming pools, Sign on Durban beach in English, Afrikaans In English it reads:  CITY OF DURBAN Under section 37 of the Durban beach by-laws, this bathing area is reserved for the sole use of members of the white race group. A signboard emblematic of the tense relations of the apartheid era, 1953. South Africa History Online John Mullen, Wikipedia, GNU Free Documentation License public toilets, were all separate for the whites and blacks. This was called segregation. They could not even visit the churches where the whites worshipped. Blacks could not form associations or protest against the terrible treatment. Since 1950, the blacks, coloured and Indians fought against the apartheid system. They launched protest marches and strikes. The African National Congress (ANC) was the umbrella organisation that led the struggle against the policies of segregation. This included many workers  unions and the Communist Party. Many sensitive whites also joined the ANC to oppose apartheid and played a leading role in this struggle. Several countries de- nounced apartheid as unjust and racist. But the white racist govern- ment continued to rule by detain- ing, torturing and killing thousands of black and coloured people. A C T I V I T Y < Make a poster on the life and struggle of Nelson < If available, read some portions of his autobi- ography, The Long Walk to Freedom, in the ards a ne ds a ne ds a ne ds a ne ds a new c As protests and struggles against apartheid had increased, the government realised that they could no longer keep the blacks under their rule through repression. The white regime changed its policies. Discriminatory laws were repealed. Ban on political parties and restrictions on the media were lifted. After 28 years of imprisonment, Nelson Mandela walked out of the jail as a free man. Finally, at the midnight of 26 April 1994, the new national flag of the Republic of South Africa was unfurled marking the newly born democracy in the world. The apartheid government came to an end, paving way for the formation of a multi-racial government. How did this come about? Let us hear Mandela, the first president of this new South Africa, on this extra-  Historical enemies succeeded in negotiating a peaceful transition from apartheid to democracy exactly because we were prepared to accept the inherent capacity for goodness in the other. My wish is that South Africans never give up on the belief in goodness, that they cherish that faith in human beings is the cornerstone of our democracy.  After the emergence of the new democratic South Africa, black leaders appealed to fellow blacks to forgive the whites for the atrocities they had committed while in power. They said let us build a new South Africa based on equality of all races and men and women, on democratic values, social justice and human rights. The party that ruled through oppression and brutal killings and the party that led the freedom struggle sat together to draw up a After two years of discussion and debate they came out with one of the finest constitutions the world has ever had. This constitution gave to its citizens the most extensive rights available in any country. Together, they decided that in the search for a solution to the problems, nobody should be excluded, no one should be treated as a demon. They agreed that everybody should become part of the solution, whatever they might have done or represented in the past. The preamble to the South sums up this spirit. What would have happened in South Africa if the black decided to take revenge on the whites for all their The South African constitution inspires democrats all over the world. A state denounced by the entire world till 1994 as the most undemocratic one is now seen as a model of democracy. What made this determination of the people of South Africa to work together, to transform bitter experiences into the binding glue of a rainbow nation. Speaking on the South African Constitution,  The Constitution of South Africa speaks of both the past and the future. On the one hand, it is a solemn pact in which we, as South Africans, declare to one another that we shall never permit a repetition of our racist, brutal and repressive past. But it is more than that. It is also a charter for the transformation of our country into one which is truly shared by all its people   a country which in the fullest sense belongs to all of us, black and white, women and This image captures the spirit of South Africa today. South Africans call themselves a  rainbow nation. Can you guess Does the story of South African struggle for freedom remind you of the Indian national movement? Make a list of similarities and dissimilarities between the two on the following points: < Nature of colonialism < Relationship between different communities < Leadership: Gandhi/ Mandela < Party that led the struggle: African National Congress/ Indian National Congress < Method of struggle 2.2 WHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION? The South African example is a good way to understand why we need a constitutions do. The oppressor and the oppressed in this new democracy were planning to live together as equals. It was not going to be easy for them to trust each other. They had their fears. They wanted to safeguard their interests. The black majority was keen to ensure that the democratic principle of majority rule was not compromised. They wanted substantial social and economic rights. The white minority was keen to protect its privileges and property. Wikipedia, GNU Free Documentation License For more details about South Africa, visit https://www.gov.za After long negotiations both parties agreed to a compromise. The whites agreed to the principle of majority rule and that of one person one vote. They also agreed to accept some basic rights for the poor and the workers. The blacks agreed that majority rule would not be absolute. They agreed that the majority would not take away the property of the white minority. This compromise was not easy. How was this compromise going to be implemented? Even if they managed to trust each other, what was the guarantee that this trust will not be broken in future? The only way to build and maintain trust in such a situation is to write down some rules of the game that everyone would abide by. These rules lay down how the rulers are to be chosen in future. These rules also determine what the elected governments are empowered to do and what they cannot do. Finally these rules decide the rights of the citizen. These rules will work only if the winner cannot change them very easily. This is what the South Africans did. They agreed on some basic rules. They also agreed that these rules will be supreme, that no government will be able to ignore these. This set of basic rules is called a constitution. Constitution making is not unique to South Africa. Every country has diverse groups of people. Their relationship may not have been as bad as that between the whites and the blacks in South Africa. But all over the world people have differences of opinion and interests. Whether democratic or not, most countries in the world need to have these basic rules. This applies not just to governments. Any association needs to have its constitution. It could be a club in your area, a cooperative society or a political party, they all need a constitution. A C T I V I T Y Approach a club or cooperative society or union or political party in your locality. Get a copy of their rule book (it is often called Rules of Association) and read it. Are these rules in accordance with principles of democracy? Do they give membership to any person without discrimination? Thus, the constitution of a country is a set of written rules that are accepted by all people living together in a country. Constitution is the supreme law that determines the relationship among people living in a territory (called citizens) and also the relationship between the people and government. A constitution does < First, it generates a degree of trust and coordination that is necessary for different kind of people to live < Second, it specifies how the government will be constituted, who will have power to take which < Third, it lays down limits on the powers of the government and tells us what the rights of the citizens aspirations of the people about creating a good society. All countries that have constitutions are not necessarily democratic. But all countries that are democratic will have constitutions. After the War of Independence against Great Britain, the Americans gave themselves a constitution. After the Revolution, the French people approved a democratic constitution. Since then it has become a practice in all democracies to have a written constitution. This is not fair! What was the point in having a Assembly in India if all the basics were 2.3 MAKING OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION like. Much of this consensus had evolved during the freedom struggle. Our national movement was not merely a struggle against a foreign rule. It was also a struggle to rejuvenate our country and to transform our society and politics. There were sharp differences of opinion within the freedom struggle about the path India should take differences exist even today. Yet some basic ideas had come to be accepted by almost everyone. As far back as in 1928, Motilal Nehru and eight other Congress leaders drafted a constitution for India. In 1931, the resolution at the Karachi session of the Indian National Congress dwelt on how independent India s constitution should look like. Both these documents were committed to the inclusion of universal adult franchise, right to freedom and equality and to protecting the rights of minorities in the constitution of independent India. Thus some basic values were accepted by all leaders much before the Constituent Assembly met to deliberate on the Constitution. The familiarity with political institutions of colonial rule also helped develop an agreement over the institutional design. The British rule had given voting rights only to a few. On that basis the British had introduced very weak legislatures. Elections were held in 1937 to Ministries all over British India. These were not fully democratic governments. But the experience gained by Indians in the working of the legislative institutions proved to be very useful for the country in setting up its own institutions and Constitution was also drawn up under very difficult circumstances. The making of the constitution for a huge and diverse country like India was not an easy affair. At that time the people of India were emerging from the status of subjects to that of citizens. The country was born through a partition on the basis of religious differences. This was a traumatic experience for the people of India and Pakistan. Atleast ten lakh people were killed on both sides of the border in partition related violence. There was another problem. The British had left it to the rulers of the princely states to decide whether they wanted to merge with India or with Pakistan or remain independent. The merger of these princely states was a difficult and uncertain task. When the constitution was being written, the future of the country did not look as secure as it does today. The makers of the constitution had anxieties about the present and the future of the country. A C T I V I T Y Speak to your grandparents or some other elders in your locality. Ask them if they have any memory of partition or independence or the making of the constitution. What were their fears and hopes about the country at that time? Discuss these in he path t th to C Despite all these difficulties, there was one big advantage for the makers of the Indian Constitution. Unlike South Africa, they did not have to create a consensus about what a democratic India should look (1875-1950) born: Gujarat. Minister of Home, Broadcasting in the Interim Government. Lawyer and leader of Bardoli peasant satyagraha. Played a decisive role in the integration of the Indian princely states. Later: Deputy Prime Minister. Abul Kalam Azad Abul Kalam Azad Abul Kalam Azad Abul Kalam Azad Abul Kalam Azad born: Saudi Arabia. Educationist, author and theologian; scholar of Arabic. Congress leader, active in the national Muslim separatist politics. Later: Education Minister in the first union cabinet. born: Tamil Nadu. and Congress leader. Later: Finance Minister in the All sketches by Rajeev Kumar working in them. That is why the Indian constitution adopted many institutional details and procedures from colonial laws like the Government of India Act, 1935. Years of thinking and deliberation on the framework of the constitution had another benefit. Our leaders gained confidence to learn from other countries, but on our own terms. Many of our leaders were inspired by the ideals of French parliamentary democracy in Britain and the Bill of Rights in the US. The socialist revolution in Russia had inspired many Indians to think of shaping a system based on social and economic equality. Yet they were not simply imitating what others had done. At each step they were questioning whether these things suited our country. All these factors contributed to the making of Who, then, were the makers of the Indian Constitution? You will find here very brief sketch of some of the leaders who played an important role in making the Constitution. A C T I V I T Y Find out more about any member of the Constituent Assembly from your state or region who is not mentioned here. Collect a photograph or make a sketch of that leader. Write a short note on him or her, following the same style as used here: Name (year of birth-year of death), place of birth (by current political boundaries), brief description of political activities; role played after the Constituent Assembly. The drafting of the document called the constitution was done by an assembly of elected representatives called the Constituent Assembly. Elections to the Constituent Assembly were held in July 1946. Its first meeting was held in December 1946. Soon after, the country was divided into India and Pakistan. The Constituent Assembly was also divided into the Constituent Assembly of India and that of Pakistan. The Constituent Assembly that wrote the Indian constitution had 299 members. The Assembly adopted the Constitution on 26 November 1949 but it came into effect on 26 January 1950. To mark this day we celebrate January 26 as Republic Day every year. Why should we accept the Constitution made by this Assembly more than seven decades ago? We have already noted one reason above. The Constitution does not reflect the views of its members alone. It expresses a broad consensus of its time. Many countries of the world have had to rewrite their Constitution afresh because the basic rules were not acceptable to all major social groups or political parties. In some other countries, the Constitution exists as a mere piece of paper. No one actually follows it. The experience of our Constitution is different. Over the last half a century, several groups have questioned some provisions of the Constitution. But no large social group or political party has ever questioned the legitimacy of the Constitution itself. This is an unusual achievement for The second reason for accepting the Constitution is that the Constituent Assembly represented the people of India. There was no universal adult franchise at that time. So the Constituent Assembly could not have been chosen directly by all the people of India. It was (1884-1963) born: Bihar. President of the Constituent Assembly. Lawyer, known for his role in the Champaran satyagraha. Three times the president of Congress. Later: the first President of India. H. C. Mookherjee H. C. Mookherjee H. C. Mookherjee H. C. Mookherjee H. C. Mookherjee Vice-Chairman of the Reputed author and leader. Member of All India Christian Council and Assembly. Later: Governor of West Bengal. A sportsman and educationist. Captain of the first national Hockey team. Founder President of Adivasi Maha Sabha. Later: founder of Jharkhand Party. elected mainly by the members of the existing Provincial Legislatures that we mentioned above. This ensured a fair geographical share of members from all the regions of the country. The Assembly was dominated by the Indian National Congress, the party that led India s freedom struggle. But the Congress itself included a variety of political groups and opinions. The Assembly had many members who did not agree with the Congress. In social terms too, the Assembly represented members from different language groups, castes, classes, religions and occupations. Even if the Constituent Assembly was elected by universal adult franchise, its composition would not have been Finally, the manner in which the Constituent Assembly worked gives sanctity to the Constitution. The Constituent Assembly worked in a systematic, open and consensual manner. First some basic principles were decided and agreed upon. Then a Drafting Committee chaired by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar prepared a draft constitution for discussion. Several rounds of thorough discussion took place on the Draft Constitution, clause by clause. More than two deliberated for 114 days spread over three years. Every document presented and every word spoken in the Constituent Assembly has been recorded and preserved. These are called  Constituent Assembly Debates. When printed, these debates are 12 bulky volumes! These debates provide the rationale behind every provision of the Constitution. These are used to interpret the meaning of the Constitution. Read the information about all the makers of the Indian Constitution given in the side columns here. You don t need to memorise this information. Just give examples from these to support the following 1. The Assembly had many members who were not with the Congress 2.The Assembly represented members from different social groups 3.Members of the Assembly believed in different ideologies 2.4 GUIDING VALUES OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION In this book we shall study the exact provisions of the Constitution on different subjects. At this stage let us begin by understanding the overall philosophy of what our Constitution is all about. We can do this in two ways. We can understand it by reading the views of some of our major leaders on our Constitution. But it is equally important to read what the Constitution says about its own philosophy. This is what the preamble to the Constitution does. Let us turn to these, one by one. The Dream and the Promise The Dream and the Promise The Dream and the Promise The Dream and the Promise The Dream and the Promise Some of you may have noticed a name missing from the sketches of the makers of the constitution: Mahatma Gandhi. He was not a Assembly. Yet there were many members who followed his vision. Years ago, writing in his magazine Young India in 1931, he had spelt out what he wanted the Constitution A successful entrepreneur and leader of the Panthic Akali Party in the Punjab Assembly. A nominee of the Congress in the Later: Defence Minister in the Union Cabinet. G. Durgabai Deshmukh born: Andhra Pradesh. Advocate and public activist for women s emancipation. Founder of Andhra Mahila Sabha. Congress leader. Later: Founder Chairperson of Central Social Welfare (1891-1956) born: Madhya Pradesh. Chairman of the Drafting Committee. Social revolutionary thinker and agitator against caste divisions and caste based inequalities. Later: Law minister in the first cabinet of post-independence India. Founder of Republican Party I shall strive for a constitution which will release India from all thralldom and patronage   I shall work for an India in which the poorest shall feel that it is their country in whose making they have an effective voice; an India in which there shall be no high class and low class of people; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect harmony. There can be no room in such an India for the curse of untouchability or the curse of the intoxicating drinks and drugs. Women will enjoy the same rights as men   I shall be satisfied with nothing else. This dream of an India that has eliminated inequality was shared by Dr. Ambedkar, who played a key role in the making of the Constitution but he had a different understanding of how inequalities could be removed. He often bitterly criticised Mahatma Gandhi and his vision. In his conclud- ing speech to the Constituent Assem bly he stated his anxiety very clearly: On the 26th of January 1950 we are going to enter a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will have inequality. In politics we will be recognising the principle of one man one vote and one vote one value. In our social and economic life, we shall, by reason of our social and economic structure, continue to deny the principle of one man one value. How long shall we continue to live this life of contradictions? How long shall we continue to deny equality in our social and economic life? If we continue to deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political democracy in peril. Finally let us turn to Jawaharlal Nehru giving his famous speech to the Constituent Assembly at the stroke of midnight on 15 August 1947: (1901-1953) born: West Bengal. Minister for Industry and Supply in the Educationist and lawyer. Active in Hindu Mahasabha. Later: Founder President of Advocate, historian and linguist. Congress leader and Gandhian. Later: Minister in the Union Cabinet. Founder of the Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny tryst with destiny tryst with destiny tryst with destiny tryst with destiny,, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity   Freedom and power bring responsibility. The responsibility rests upon this Assembly, a sovereign body representing the sovereign people of India. Before the birth of freedom we have endured all the pains of labour and our hearts are heavy with the memory of this sorrow. Some of those pains continue even now. Nevertheless, the past is over and it is the future that beckons to us now. That future is not one of ease or resting but of incessant striving so that we may fulfil the pledges we have so often taken and the one we shall take today. The service of India means the service of the millions who suffer. It means the ending of poverty and ignorance and disease and inequality of opportunity. The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe every tear from every eye. That may be beyond us, but as long as there are tears and suffering, so long our work will not be over. Read the three quotations above carefully. < Can you identify one idea that is common to all these three? < What are the differences in their ways of expressing that common idea? (1889-1964) born: Uttar Pradesh. Prime Minister of the interim government. Lawyer and Congress leader. Advocate of socialism, democracy and anti-imperialism. Later: First Prime Minister of India. born: Andhra Pradesh. Poet, writer and political activist. Among the foremost women leaders in the Congress. Later: Governor of Uttar Pradesh. (1901-1984) born: West Bengal. Writer and editor. Leader of the Communist Party of India. Later: Member of West Bengal in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish thisConstitution for the United States of America. We, the people of South Africa, Recognise the injustices of our past; Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity. We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to   Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights; Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law; Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of nations. May God protect our people. Nkosi Sikelel  iAfrika. Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso. God se n Suid-Afrika. God bless South Africa. Mudzimu fhatutshedza Afurika. Hosi katekisa Afrika. Philosophy of the Philosophy of the Philosophy of the Philosophy of the Philosophy of the Values that inspired and guided the freedom struggle and were in turn nurtured by it, formed the foundation for India s democracy. These values are embedded in the Constitution. They guide all the articles of the Indian Constitution. The Constitution begins with a short statement of its basic values. This is called the Preamble to the constitution. Taking inspiration from American model, most countries in the contemporary world have chosen to begin their constitutions with a preamble. The head of the state is an elected person and not a hereditary Citizens cannot be discriminated on the grounds of caste, religion and gender. have to be reduced. work for the welfare of all, especially of There are no restrictions on the citizens in what they think, how they wish to express their thoughts and the way they wish to follow up their thoughts in action. All are equal before the law. The traditional have to be ended. The opportunity for all. All of us should behave as if we are members of the same family. No one should treat a fellow citizen WE, THE PEOPLE WE, THE PEOPLE WE, THE PEOPLE WE, THE PEOPLE WE, THE PEOPLE The constitution has been drawn up and enacted by the people not handed down to them by a king or any People have supreme right to make decisions on internal as well as external matters. No external power can dictate the government of India. Wealth is generated socially and should be shared equally by should regulate the ownership of land and industry to reduce complete freedom to follow any religion. But there is no official treats all religious beliefs and practices with equal respect. A form of government where people enjoy equal political rights, elect their rulers and hold them account- able. The government is run according to some basic rules. Let us read the Preamble of our Constitution very carefully and understand the meaning of each of its The Preamble of the Constitution reads like a poem on democracy. It contains the philosophy on which the entire Constitution has been built. It provides a standard to examine and evaluate any law and action of government, to find out whether it is good or bad. It is the soul of the Indian Constitution. Note: *The terms  Socialist  and  Secular  were added in Preamble through the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Compare the Preambles to the constitutions of the United States of America, India and South Africa. < Make a list of ideas that are common to all these three. < Note down at least one of the major differences among these. < Which of the three makes a reference to the past? < Which of these does not invoke God? A constitution is not merely a statement of values and philosophy. As we noted above, a constitution is mainly about embodying these values into institutional arrangements. Much of the document called Constitution of India is about these arrangements. It is a very long and detailed document. Therefore it needs to be amended quite regularly to keep it updated. Those who crafted the Indian Constitution felt that it has to be in accordance with people s aspirations and changes in society. They did not see it as a sacred, static and unalterable law. So, they made provisions to incorporate changes from time to time. These changes are called constitutional amendments. The Constitution describes the institutional arrangements in a very legal language. If you read the Constitution for the first time, it can be quite difficult to understand. Yet the basic institutional design is not very difficult to understand. Like any Constitution lays down a procedure for choosing persons to govern the country. It defines who will have how much power to take which decisions. And it puts limits to what the government can do by providing some rights to the citizen that cannot be violated. The remaining three chapters in this book are about these three aspects of the working of Indian constitution. We shall look provisions in each chapter and understand how they work in democratic politics. But this textbook will not cover all the salient features of the institutional design in the Indian Constitution. Some other aspects will be covered in your textbook next year. Apartheid: The official policy of racial separation and ill treatment of blacks followed by the government of South Africa between 1948 and 1989. Clause: A distinct section of a document. Constituent Assembly: An assembly of people s representatives that writes a constitution for a country. Constitution: Supreme law of a country, containing fundamental rules governing the politics and society in a country. Constitutional amendment: A change in the constitution made by the supreme legislative body in a country. Draft: A preliminary version of a legal document. Philosophy: The most fundamental principles underlying one s thoughts Preamble: An introductory statement in a constitution which states the reasons and guiding values of the constitution. Treason: The offence of attempting to overthrow the government of the state to which the offender owes allegiance. Tryst: A meeting or meeting place that has been agreed upon. Here are some false statements. Identify the mistake in each case and rewrite these correctly based on what you have read in this a Leaders of the freedom movement had an open mind about whether the country should be democratic or not after independence. b Members of the Constituent Assembly of India held the same views on all provisions of the Constitution. c A country that has a constitution must be a democracy. d Constitution cannot be amended because it is the supreme law of Which of these was the most salient underlying conflict in the mak- ing of a democratic constitution in South Africa? a Between South Africa and its neighbours b Between men and women c Between the white majority and the black minority d Between the coloured minority and the black majority Which of these is a provision that a democratic constitution does not a Powers of the head of the state b Name of the head of the state c Powers of the legislature d Name of the country Match the following leaders with their roles in the making of the a Motilal Nehru President of the Constituent Assembly b B.R. Ambedkar Member of the Constituent Assembly c Rajendra Prasad iii Chairman of the Drafting Committee d Sarojini Naidu iv Prepared a Constitution for India in 1928 Read again the extracts from Nehru s speech  Tryst with Destiny  and answer the following: a Why did Nehru use the expression  not wholly or in full measure  in the first sentence? b What pledge did he want the makers of the Indian Constitution to c  The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe every tear from every eye. Who was he referring to? Here are some of the guiding values of the Constitution and their meaning. Rewrite them by matching them correctly. Government will not favour any religion. ii People have the supreme right to make decisions. iii Head of the state is an elected person. iv People should live like brothers and sisters. How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November 26th? Prepare a brief report. Here are different opinions about what made India a democracy. How much importance would you give to each of these factors? a Democracy in India is a gift of the British rulers. We received training to work with representative legislative institutions under the British b Freedom Struggle challenged the colonial exploitation and denial of different freedoms to Indians. Free India could not be anything c We were lucky to have leaders who had democratic convictions. The denial of democracy in several other newly independent countries shows the important role of these leaders. Read the following extract from a conduct book for  married women, published in 1912.  God has made the female species delicate and fragile both physically and emotionally, pitiably incapable of self-defence. They are destined thus by God to remain in male protection   of father, husband and son   all their lives. Women should, therefore, not despair, but feel obliged that they can dedicate themselves to the service of men. Do you think the values expressed in this para reflected the values underlying our constitution? Or does this go against the constitutional values? Read the following statements about a constitution. Give reasons why each of these is true or not true. a The authority of the rules of the constitution is the same as that of any other law. b Constitution lays down how different organs of the government will c Rights of citizens and limits on the power of the government are laid down in the constitution. d A constitution is about institutions, not about values Follow the newspapers for any report on a discussion on any constitutional amendment or demand for any constitutional amendment. You could, for example, focus on the demand for constitutional amendment for reservation for women in legislatures. Was there a public debate? What reasons were put forward in favour of the amendment?  How did different parties react to the constitutional amendment? Did the amendment take place? Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi In Chapter 1 we have seen that in a democracy it is neither possible nor necessary for people to govern directly. The most common form of democracy in our times is for the people to govern through their representatives. In this chapter we will look at how these representatives are elected. We begin by understanding why elections are necessary and useful in a democracy. We try to understand how electoral competition among parties serves the people. We then go on to ask what makes an election democratic. The basic idea here is to distinguish democratic elections from non-democratic elections. The rest of the chapter tries to assess elections in India in the light of this yardstick. We take a look at each stage of elections, from the drawing of boundaries of different constituencies to the declaration of results. At each stage we ask what should happen and what does happen in elections. Towards the end of the chapter, we turn to an assessment of whether elections in India are free and fair. Here we also examine the role of the Election Commission in ensuring free and fair elections. 3.1 WHY ELECTIONS? government would waive the loans of farmers and small businessmen. He promised that this would be the first action of his government. The people were unhappy with the existing government. They were also attracted by Devi Lal s promise. So, when elections were held, they voted overwhelmingly in favour of Lok Dal and its allies. Lok Dal and its partners won 76 out of 90 seats in the State Assembly. Lok Dal alone won 60 seats and thus had a clear majority in the Assembly. The Congress could win only 5 seats. Once the election results were announced, the sitting Chief Minister resigned. The newly elected Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) of Lok Dal chose Devi Lal as their leader. The Governor invited Devi Lal to be the new Chief Minister. Three days after the election results were declared, he became the Chief Minister. As soon as he became the Chief Minister, his Government issued a Government Order waiving the outstanding loans of small farmers, agricultural labourers and small businessmen. His party ruled the State for four years. The next elections were held in 1991. But this time his party did not win popular support. The Congress won the election and formed the government. Assembly Election in Assembly Election in Assembly Election in Assembly Election in Assembly Election in Do most leaders fulfil their election Jagdeep and Navpreet read this story and drew the following conclusions. Can you say which of these are right or wrong (or if the information given in the story is inadequate to call them right or < Elections can lead to changes in the policy of the government. < The Governor invited Devi Lal to become the Chief Minister because he was impressed with his < People are unhappy with every ruling party and vote against it in the next election. < The party that wins the election forms the government. < This election led to a lot of economic development in Haryana. < The Congress Chief Minister need not have resigned after his party lost elections. This newspaper report is about the State assembly election in Haryana in 1987. The State had been ruled by a Congress party led government since 1982. Chaudhary Devi Lal, then an opposition leader, led a movement called  Nyaya Yudh  (Struggle for Justice) and formed a new party, Lok Dal. His party joined other opposition parties to form a front against the Congress in the elections. In the election campaign, Devi Lal said that if his party won the elections, his The time is after midnight. An expectant crowd sitting for the past five hours in a chowk of the town is waiting for its leader to come. The organisers assure and reas- sure the crowd that he would be here any moment. The crowd stands up whenever a passing vehicle comes that way. It arouses hopes that he has come. The leader is Mr. Devi Lal, chief of the Haryana Sangharsh Samiti, who was to address a meeting in Karnal on Thurs- day night. The 76-year-old leader, is a very busy man these days. His day starts at 8 a.m. and ends after 11 p.m.   he had already addressed nine election meetings since morning  been con- stantly addressing public meetings for the past 23 months and preparing for this A C T I V I T Y Do you know when the last Assembly election was held in your state? Which other elections have taken place in your locality in the last five years? Write down the level of elections (National, Assembly, Panchayat, etc.), when were they held and the name and designation (MP, MLA, etc.) of the persons who got elected from your area. hy do w y do w y do w y do w y do we nee e need ele Elections take place regularly in any democracy. There are more than one hundred countries in the world in which elections take place to choose people s representatives. We also read that elections are held in many countries that are not But why do we need elections? Let us try to imagine a democracy without elections. A rule of the people is possible without any elections if all the people can sit together everyday and take all the decisions. But as we have already seen in Chapter 1, this is not possible in any large community. Nor is it possible for everyone to have the time and knowledge to take decisions on all matters. Therefore in most democracies Is there a democratic way of selecting representatives without elections? Let us think of a place where representatives are selected on the basis of age and experience. Or a place where they are chosen on the basis of education or knowledge. There could be some difficulty in deciding on who is more experienced or knowledgable. But let us say the people can resolve these difficulties. Clearly, such a place does not require elections. But can we call this place a democracy? How do we find out if the people like their representatives or not? How do we ensure that these representatives rule as per the wishes of the people? How to make sure that those who the people don t representatives? This requires a mechanism by which people can choose their representatives at regular intervals and change them if they wish to do so. This mechanism is called election. Therefore, elections are considered essential in our times for any In an election the voters make < They can choose who will make laws for them. < They can choose who will form the government and take major < They can choose the party whose policies will guide the government and law making. t makes an ele es an ele es an ele es an ele es an elec Elections can be held in many ways. All democratic countries hold elections. But most non-democratic countries also hold some kind of elections. How do we distinguish democratic elections from any other election? We have discussed this question briefly in Chapter 1. We discussed many examples of countries where elections are held but they can t really be called democratic elections. Let us recall what we learnt there and start with a simple list of the minimum conditions of a democratic election: < First, everyone should be able to choose. This means that everyone should have one vote and every vote should have equal value. We have seen why to have elections. But why do rulers countries need to something to choose from. Parties and candidates should be free to contest elections and should offer some real choice to the voters. < Third, the choice should be offered at regular intervals. Elections must be held regularly after every few < Fourth, the candidate preferred by the people should get elected. < Fifth, elections should be conducted in a free and fair manner where people can choose as they really wish. These might look like very simple and easy conditions. But there are many countries where these are not fulfilled. In this chapter we will apply these conditions to the elections held in our own country to see if we can call these democratic elections. Is it good t s it good t s it good t s it good t s it good to ha Elections are thus all about political competition. This competition takes various forms. The most obvious form is the competition among political parties. At the constituency level, it takes the form of competition among several candidates. If there is no competition, elections will become But is it good to have political competition? Clearly, an electoral competition has many demerits. It creates a sense of disunity and  factionalism  in every locality. You would have heard of people complaining of  party-politics  in your locality. Different political parties and leaders often level allegations against one another. Parties and candidates often use dirty tricks to win elections. Some people say that this pressure to win electoral fights does not allow sensible long-term policies to be formulated. Some good people who may wish to serve the country do not enter this arena. They do not like the idea of being dragged into unhealthy Our Constitution makers were aware of these problems. Yet they opted for free competition in elections as the way to select our future leaders. They did so because this system works better in the long run. In an ideal world all political leaders know what is good for the people and are motivated only by a desire to serve them. Political competition is not necessary in such an ideal world. But that is not what happens in real life. Political leaders all over the world, like all other professionals, are motivated by a desire to advance their political careers. They want to remain in power or get power and positions for themselves.They may wish to serve the people as well, but it is risky to depend entirely on their sense of duty. Besides even when they wish to serve the people, they may not know what is required to do so, or their ideas may not match what the people really want. How do we deal with this real life situation? One way is to try and improve the knowledge and character of political leaders. The other and more realistic way is to set up a system where political leaders are rewarded for serving the people and punished for not doing so. Who decides this reward or punishment? The simple answer is: the people. This is what electoral competition does. Regular electoral competition provides incentives to political parties and leaders. They know that if they raise issues that people want to be raised, their popularity and chances of victory will increase in the next elections. But if they fail to satisfy the voters with their work they will not be able to win again. Ah! So, elections are like exams and parties know if they have passed or failed. But who are the examiners? Can we say that Indian elections are democratic? To answer this question, let us take a look at how elections are held in India. Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha (Assembly) elections are held regularly after every five years. After five years the term of all the elected representatives comes to an end. The Lok Sabha or Vidhan Sabha stands  dissolved. Elections are held in all constituencies at the same time, either on the same day or within a few days. This is called a general election. Sometimes election is held only for one constitutency to fill the vacancy caused by death or resignation of a member. This is called a by-election. In this chapter we will focus on general elections. You read about the people of Haryana electing 90 MLAs. You may have wondered how they did that. Did every person in Haryana vote for all the 90 MLAs? You perhaps know that this is not the case. In our country we follow an area based system of representation. The country is divided into different areas for purposes of elections. These areas are called electoral constitutencies. The voters who live in an area elect one representative. So if a political party is motivated only by desire to be in power, even then it will be forced to serve the people. This is a bit like the way market works. Even if a shopkeeper is interested only in his profit, he is forced to give good service to the customers. If he does not, the customer will go to some other shop. Similarly, political competition may cause divisions and some ugliness, but it finally helps to force political parties and leaders to serve the 3.2 WHAT IS OUR SYSTEM OF ELECTIONS? Read these two cartoons carefully. Write the message of each of them in your own words. Have a discussion in class on which of the two is closer to the reality in your own locality. Draw a cartoon to depict what elections do to the relationship between voters and political leaders. GULBARGA LOK SABHA CONSTITUENCY For Lok Sabha elections, the country is divided into 543 constituencies. The representative elected from each constituency is called a Member of Parliament or an MP. One of the features of a democratic election is that every vote should have equal value. That is why our Constitution requires that each constituency should have a roughly equal population living within it. Similarly, each state is divided into a specific number of Assembly constituencies. In this case, the elected representative is called the Member of Legislative Assembly or an MLA. Each Parliamentary GULBARGA (KALABURAGI) DISTRICT constituency has within it several assembly constituencies. The same principle applies for Panchayat and Municipal elections. Each village or town is divided into several  wards  that are like constituencies. Each ward elects one member of the village or the urban local body. Sometimes these constituencies are counted as  seats, for each constituency represents one seat in the assembly. When we say that  Lok Dal won 60 seats  in Haryana, it means that candidates of Lok Dal won in 60 assembly constituencies in the state and thus Lok Dal had 60 MLAs in the state assembly. < Why is the boundary of the Gulbarga Lok Sabha constituency not the same as the district boundary of Gulbarga (Kalaburagi)? Draw a similar map for your own Lok Sabha < How many Assembly constituencies are there in the Gulbarga Lok Sabha constituency? Is it the same in your own Lok Sabha Our Constitution entitles every citizen to elect her/his representative and to be elected as a representative. The Constitution makers, however, were worried that in an open electoral competition, certain weaker sections may not stand a good chance to get elected to the Lok Sabha and the state Legislative Assemblies. They may not have the required resources, education and contacts to contest and win elections against others. Those who are influential and resourceful may prevent them from winning elections. If that happens, our Parliament and Assemblies would be deprived of the voice of a significant section of our population. That would make our democracy less representative and less democratic. So, the makers of our Constitution thought of a special system of reserved constituencies for the weaker sections. Some constituencies are reserved for people who belong to the Scheduled Castes [SC] and Scheduled Tribes [ST]. In a SC reserved constituency only someone who belongs to the Scheduled Castes can stand for election. Similarly only those belonging to the Scheduled Tribes can contest an election from a constituency reserved for ST. Currently, in the Lok Sabha, 84 seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and 47 for the Scheduled Tribes (as on 26 January 2019). This number is in proportion to their share in the total population. Thus the reserved seats for SC and ST do not take away the legitimate share of any other social group. This system of reservation was extended later to other weaker sections at the district and local level. In many states, seats in rural (panchayat) and urban (municipalities and corporations) local bodies are now reserved for Other Backward Classes (OBC) as well. However, the proportion of seats reserved varies from state to state. Similarly, one-third of the seats are reserved in rural and urban local bodies for women Once the constituencies are decided, the next step is to decide who can and who cannot vote. This decision cannot be left to anyone till the last day. In a democratic election, the list of those who are eligible to vote is prepared much before the election and given to everyone. This list is officially called the Electoral Roll and is commonly known as the This is an important step for it is linked to the first condition of a democratic election: everyone should get an equal opportunity to choose representatives. Earlier, we read about the principle of universal adult franchise. In practice it means that everyone should have one vote and each vote should have equal value. No one should be denied the right to vote without a good reason. Different citizens differ from one another in many ways: some are rich, some are poor; some are highly educated, some are not so educated or not educated at all; some are kind, others are not so kind. But all of them are human beings with their own needs and views. That is why all of them deserve to have an equal say in decisions that affect them. In our country, all the citizens aged 18 years and above can vote in an election. Every citizen has the right to vote, regardless of his or her caste, religion or gender. Some criminals and persons with unsound mind  can Do you know,  like one-third of the seats in Parliament also been reserved for women as per Nari Shakti Vandan LOK SABHA CONSTITUENCIES Andaman & Nicobar Dadra & Nagar Haveli Daman & Diu Jammu and Kashmir See the map above and answer the following questions. < What is the number of Lok Sabha constituencies in your state and the neighbouring two states? < Which states have more than 30 Lok Sabha constituencies? < Why do some states have such a large number of constituencies? < Why are some constituencies small in area while others are very big? < Are the constituencies reserved for the SCs and STs evenly spread all over the entire country or are there more in some areas? Election Commission of India be denied the right to vote, but only in rare situations. It is the responsibility of the government to get the names of all the eligible voters put on the voters  list. As new persons attain voting age names are added to the voters  list. Names of those who move out of a place or those who are dead are deleted. A complete revision of the list takes place every five years. This is done to ensure that it remains up to date. In the last few years a new system of Election Photo Identity Card [EPIC] has been introduced. The government has tried to give this card to every person on the voters list. The voters are required to carry this card when they go out to vote, so that no one can vote for someone else. But the card is not yet compulsory for voting. For voting, the voters can show many other proofs of identity like the ration card or the driving licence. omination of candida tion of candida tion of candida tion of candida tion of candidat We noted above that in a democratic election people should have a real choice. This happens only when there are almost no restrictions on anyone to contest an election. This is what our system provides. Any- one who can be a voter can also be- come a candidate in elections. The only difference is that in order to be a candidate the minimum age is 25 years, while it is only 18 years for being a voter. There are some other restrictions on criminals etc. but these apply in very extreme cases. Political parties nominate their can- didates who get the party symbol and support. Party s nomination is often called party  ticket. Every person who wishes to contest an election has to fill a  nomination form  and give some money as  security deposit. Recently, a new system of declaration has been introduced on direction from the Supreme Court. Every candidate has to make a legal declaration, giving full details of: < Serious criminal cases pending against the candidate; < Details of the assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her < Educational qualifications of the This information has to be made public. This provides an opportunity to the voters to make their decision on the basis of the information provided by the candidates. Why are the required to give a of their property? Educational qualifications for Why is there no educational qualification for holding such an important position when some kind of educational qualification is needed for any other job in the country? < Educational qualifications are not relevant to all kinds of jobs. The relevant qualification for selection to the Indian cricket team, for example, is not the attainment of educational degrees but the ability to play cricket well. Similarly the relevant qualification for being an MLA or an MP is the ability to understand people s concerns, problems and to represent their interests. Whether they can do so or not is examined by lakhs of examiners   their voters   after every five years. < Even if education was relevant, it should be left to the people to decide how much importance they give to educational < In our country putting an educational qualification would go against the spirit of democracy for yet another reason. It would mean depriving a majority of the country s citizens the right to contest elections. If, for example, a graduate degree like B.A., B.Com or B.Sc was made compulsory for candidates, more than 90 per cent of the citizens will become ineligible to contest elections. The main purpose of election is to give people a chance to choose the representatives, the government and the policies they prefer. Therefore it is necessary to have a free and open discussion about who is a better representative, which party will make a better government or what is a good policy. This is what happens during election campaigns. In our country such campaigns take place for a two-week period between the announcement of the final list of candidates and the date of polling. During this period the candidates contact their voters, political leaders address election meetings and political parties mobilise their supporters. This is also the period when newspapers and television news are full of election related stories and debates. But election campaign is not limited to these two weeks only. Political parties start preparing for elections months before they actually take A C T I V I T Y How was the election campaign in your constituency in the last Lok Sabha elections? Prepare a list of what the candidates and parties said and did. In election campaigns, political parties try to focus public attention on some big issues. They want to attract the public to that issue and get them to vote for their party on that basis. Let us look at some of the successful slogans given by different political parties in various elections. < The Congress party led by Indira Gandhi gave the slogan of Garibi Hatao (Remove poverty) in the Lok Sabha elections of 1971. The party promised to reorient all the policies of the government to remove poverty from the country. < Save Democracy was the slogan given by Janata Party under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, in the Lok Sabha election held in 1977. The party promised to undo the excesses committed during Emergency and restore civil < The Left Front used the slogan of Land to the Tiller in the West Bengal Assembly elections held in <  Protect the Self-Respect of the Telugus  was the slogan used by N. T. Rama Rao, the leader of the Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh Assembly elections in In a democracy it is best to leave political parties and candidates free to conduct their election campaigns the way they want to. But it is sometimes necessary to regulate Match the following features of our electoral system with the principles they reflect. Features of election system Each constituency has roughly the same population Everyone who is 18 years of age or older has a right to vote Anyone can form a party or contest elections Reservation of seats for the SCs and the STs Universal adult franchise Open political competition One vote one value campaigns to ensure that every political party and candidate gets a fair and equal chance to compete. According to our election law, no party or candidate can: < Bribe or threaten voters; < Appeal to them in the name of caste or religion; < Use government resources for election campaign; and < Spend more than ` 25 lakh in a constituency for a Lok Sabha election or ` 10 lakh in a constituency in an If they do so, their election can be rejected by the court even after they have been declared elected. In addition to the laws, all the political parties in our country have agreed to a Model Code of Conduct for election campaigns. According to this, no party or candidate can: < Use any place of worship for < Use government vehicles, aircrafts and officials for elections; and < Once elections are announced, Ministers shall not lay foundation stones of any projects, take any big policy decisions or make any promises of providing public facilities. Polling and c olling and c olling and c olling and c olling and coun ounting of v ting of v ting of v ting of v ting of vot The final stage of an election is the day when the voters cast or  poll  their vote. That day is usually called the election day. Every person whose name is on the voters  list can go to a nearby  polling booth, situated usually in a local school or a government office. Once the voter goes inside the booth, the election officials identify her, put a mark on her finger and allow her to cast her vote. An agent of each candidate is allowed to sit inside the polling booth and ensure that the voting takes place in a fair way. Are the elections too expensive for our country? A large amount of money is spent in conducting elections in India. For instance, the government spent about `3,500 crores in conducting Lok Sabha elections in 2014. That works out to about `40 per person on the voters  list. The amount spent by parties and candidates was more than what the government spent. Roughly speaking, the expenditure made by government, parties and candidates was around `30,000 crores or `500 Some people say that elections are a burden on our people, that our poor country cannot afford to hold elections once every five years. Let us compare this expenditure with some other figures: < In 2005, our government decided to buy six nuclear submarines from France. Each subma- rine cost about `3,000 crores. < Delhi hosted the Commonwealth Games in 2010. The estimate for its cost is around Are the elections too expensive? You decide. Earlier the voters used to indicate who they wanted to vote for by putting a stamp on the ballot paper. A ballot paper is a sheet of paper on which the names of the contesting candidates along with party name and symbols are listed. Nowadays electronic voting machines (EVM) are used to record votes. The machine shows the names of the candidates and the party symbols. Independent candidates too have their own symbols, allotted by election commission. All that the voter has to do is to press the button against the name of the candidate she wants to give her vote. Once the polling is over, all the EVMs are sealed and taken to a Why are party agents present in the polling booth and the counting Election result in Gulbarga Let us go back to our example of Gulbarga. In 2014, a total of 8 candidates contested elections in that constituency. The total eligible voters were 17.21 lakhs. Of these 9.98 lakh voters had cast their votes. The candidate of the Congress party, Mallikarjun Kharge secured about 5.07 lakh votes. This was 50.82 percent of the total votes polled. But since he had secured more votes than anyone else, he was declared elected a Member of Parliament from Gulbarga Lok Sabha constituency. Election Result of Gulbarga constituency, GENERAL ELECTION TO LOK SABHA, 2014 % OF VOTES Danni Mahadev B. B.T. Lalitha Naik None of the Above Identify the fair and the unfair electoral practices among the following: < A minister flags off a new train in his constituency a week before polling day. < A candidate promises that she will get a new train for her constituency if she is elected. < Supporters of a candidate take the voters to a temple and make them take an oath that they will vote for him. < The supporters of a candidate distribute blankets in slums in return for a promise for vote. secure place. A few days later, on a fixed date, all the EVMs from a constituency are opened and the votes secured by each candidate are counted. The agents of all candidates are present there to ensure that the counting is done properly. The candidate who secures the highest number of votes from a constituency is declared elected. In a general election, usually the counting of votes in all the constituencies takes place at the same time, on the same day. Television channels, radio and newspapers report this event. Within a few hours of counting, all the results are declared and it becomes clear as to who will form the next government. < What is the percentage of voters who had actually cast their votes? < To win an election is it necessary for a person to secure more than half the votes polled? 3.3 WHAT MAKES ELECTIONS IN INDIA Election Commissioner (CEC) is appointed by the President of India. But once appointed, the Chief Election Commissioner is not answerable to the President or the government. Even if the ruling party or the government does not like what the Commission does, it is virtually impossible for it to remove the CEC. Very few election commissions in the world have such wide-ranging powers as the Election Commission < EC takes decisions on every aspect of conduct and control of elections from the announcement of elections to the declaration of < It implements the Code of Conduct and punishes any candidate or party that violates it. < During the election period, the EC can order the government to follow some guidelines, to prevent use and misuse of governmental power to enhance its chances to win elections, or to transfer some < When on election duty, govern- ment officers work under the con- trol of the EC and not the govern- In the last 25 years or so, the Election Commission has begun to exercise all its powers and even expand them. It is very common now for the Election Commission to reprimand the government and administration for their lapses. When election officials come to the opinion that polling was not fair in some booths or even an entire constituency, they order a repoll. The ruling parties often do not like what the EC does. But they have to obey. This would not have happened if the EC was not independent and powerful. We get to read a lot about unfair practices in elections. Newspapers and television reports often refer to such allegations. Most of these reports are about the following: < Inclusion of false names and exclusion of genuine names in the < Misuse of government facilities and officials by the ruling party; < Excessive use of money by rich candidates and big parties; and < Intimidation of voters and rigging on the polling day. Many of these reports are correct. We feel unhappy when we read or see such reports. But fortunately they are not on such a scale so as to defeat the very purpose of elections. This becomes clear if we ask a basic question: Can a party win an election and come to power not because it has popular support but through electoral malpractices? This is a vital question. Let us carefully examine various aspects of this One simple way of checking whether elections are fair or not is to look at who conducts the elections. Are they independent of the government? Or can the government or the ruling party influence or pressurise them? Do they have enough powers to be able to conduct free and fair elections? Do they actually use these powers? The answer to all these questions is quite positive for our country. In our country elections are conducted by an independent and very powerful Election Commission (EC). It enjoys the same kind of independence that the judiciary enjoys. The Chief Why does the so much powers? Is this good for For more details about the Election Commission EC accepts new Haryana DGP EC issues notification constituting 14th Photo I-cards not mandatory in Bihar EC tightens norms for poll expenses EC to visit Gujarat again, review poll EC will seek power to censure HC asks EC to bar  criminal  netas EC says no immediate plan to ban EC shoots down HM advice on EC orders repoll in 398 more booths EC to keep closer eye on hidden Read these headlines carefully and identify which powers are used by the Election Commission in each instance to ensure free and fair elections. Another way to check the quality of the election process is to see whether people participate in it with enthusiasm. If the election process is not free or fair, people will not continue to participate in the exercise. Now,  read these charts and draw some conclusions about participation in India: VOTER TURNOUT (%) 1 VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND THE UK 1 People s participation in election is usually measured by voter turnout figures. Turnout indicates the per cent of eligible voters who actually cast their vote. Over the last fifty years, the turnout in Europe and North America has declined. In India the turnout has either remained stable or actually 2 In India the poor, illiterate and underprivileged people vote in larger proportion as compared to the rich and privileged sections. This is in contrast to western democracies. For example in the United States of America, poor people, African Americans and Hispanics vote much less than the rich and the white people. 3 Common people in India attach a lot of importance to elections. They feel that through elections they can bring pressure on political parties to adopt policies and programmes favourable to them. They also feel that their vote matters in the way things are run in the country. 2 VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND US BY SOCIAL GROUPS, 2004 Source: Figures for India from National Election Study 2004, CSDS. Figures for US from National Election Study 2004, University of I N D I A VOTER TURNOUT (%) A C T I V I T Y Ask the eligible voters in your family whether they voted in the last election to the Lok Sabha or to the state assembly. If they did not, ask them why did they not vote. If they did, ask them which party and candidate they voted for and why. Also ask them whether they had participated in any other election-related activity like attending an election meeting or rally etc. Acceptance of election Acceptance of election Acceptance of election Acceptance of election Acceptance of election One final test of the free and fairness of election has in the outcome itself. If elections are not free or fair, the outcome always favours the powerful. In such a situation, the ruling parties do not lose elections. Usually, the 3 DO YOU THINK YOUR VOTE MAKES A DIFFERENCE? Has no effect Source: National Election Study 2004, CSDS. 4 THOSE WHO PARTICIPATED IN ANY ELECTION RELATED ACTIVITY IN INDIA Source: National Election Study 1996-2004, CSDS. 4 The interest of voters in election- related activities has been increasing over the years. During the 2004 elections, more than one- third voters took part in a campaign-related activities. More than half of the people identified themselves as being close to one or the other political party. One out of every seven voters is a member of a political party. losing party does not accept the outcome of a rigged election. The outcome of India s elections speaks for itself: < The ruling parties routinely lose elections in India both at the national and state level. In fact in every two out of the three elections held in the last 25 years, the ruling party lost. < In the US, an incumbent or  sitting  elected representative rarely loses an election. In India about half of the sitting MPs or MLAs lose < Candidates who are known to have spent a lot of money on  buying votes  and those with known criminal connections often lose < Barring very few disputed elections, the electoral outcomes are usually accepted as  people s verdict  by the defeated party. hallenges to fr o free and fair ee and fair ee and fair ee and fair ee and fair All this leads to a simple conclusion: elections in India are basically free and fair. The party that wins an elec- tion and forms government does so because people have chosen it over its rivals. This may not be true for every constituency. A few candidates may win purely on the basis of money power and unfair means. But the overall verdict of a general elec- tion still reflects popular preference. There are very few exceptions to this rule in the last 60 years in our country. This is what makes Indian Yet the picture looks different if we ask deeper questions: Are people s preferences based on real knowledge? Are the voters getting a real choice? Is election really level playing field for everyone? Can an ordinary citizen hope to win elections? Questions of this kind bring the many limitations and challenges of Indian elections to our attention. These include: The leader is coming out of a press conference:  What was the need to say that we have distributed tickets only amongst suitable and winnable family relations?  Do you think that family politics is confined to only a few states or parties? cartoon was drawn in the Latin American context. Does this apply to India and to other in the world?  Nerilicon, El Economista, Cagle Cartoons Inc. < Candidates and parties with a lot of money may not be sure of their victory but they do enjoy a big and unfair advantage over smaller parties and independents. < In some parts of the country, candidates with criminal connection have been able to push others out of the electoral race and to secure a  ticket  from major parties. < Some families tend to dominate political parties; tickets are distributed to relatives from these < Very often elections offer little choice to ordinary citizens, for both the major parties are quite similar to each other both in policies and practice. < Smaller parties and independent disadvantage compared to bigger These challenges exist not just in India but also in many established democracies. These deeper issues are a matter of concern for those who believe in democracy. That is why citizens, social activists and organisations have been demanding reforms in our electoral system. Can you think of some reforms? What can an ordinary citizen do to face Is this an accurate picture of what happens to the voter before and after elections? Must this always happen in a democracy? Can you think of examples when this did not Here are some facts on Indian elections. Comment on each of these to say whether they reflect the strength or the weakness of our electoral system: < The 16th Lok Sabha has 12 per cent women members. < The Election Commission often refuses to accept the government s advice about when the elections should be held. < The 16th Lok Sabha has more than 440 members whose assets are more than Rs.1 crore. < After losing an election the Chief Minister said:  I respect the people s verdict. R.K. Laxman, The Times of India Code of Conduct: A set of norms and guidelines to be followed by political parties and contesting candidates during election time. Constituency: Voters in a geographical area who elect a representative to the legislative bodies. Incumbent: The current holder of a political office. Usually the choice for the voters in elections is between the incumbent party or candidate and those who oppose them. Level playing field: Condition in which all parties and candidates contesting in an election have equal opportunities to appeal for votes and to carry out election campaign. Rigging: Fraud and malpractices indulged by a party or candidate to increase its votes. It includes stuffing ballot boxes by a few persons using the votes of others; recording multiple votes by the same person; and bribing or coercing polling officers to favour a candidate. Turnout: The percentage of eligible voters who cast their votes in an election. Which of the following statements about the reasons for conducting elections are false? a Elections enable people to judge the performance of the b People select the representative of their choice in an election. c Elections enable people to evaluate the performance of the d People can indicate which policies they prefer. Which of these is not a good reason to say that Indian elections are a India has the largest number of voters in the world. b India s Election Commission is very powerful. c In India, everyone above the age of 18 has a right to vote. d In India, the losing parties accept the electoral verdict. Match the following: It is necessary to keep the voters list up to date because Some constituencies are reserved for SCs and STs so Everyone has one and only one vote so that Party in power is not allowed to use government vehicles there is a fair representation of all sections of our society opportunity to elect their all candidates must have a fair chance of competing in some people may have moved away from the area where they List all the different election related activities mentioned in the chapter and arrange them in a time sequence, beginning with the first activity and ending with the last. Some of these activities are given below: releasing election manifestos; counting of votes; making of voters  list; election campaign; declaration of election results; casting of votes; ordering of re-poll; announcing election schedule; filing nomination. Surekha is an officer in-charge of ensuring free and fair elections in an assembly constituency in a state. Describe what should she focus on for each of the following stages of election: a Election campaign b Polling day c Counting day The table below gives the proportion of different communities among the candidates who won elections to the US Congress. Compare these to the proportion of these communities in the population of the US. Based on this, would you suggest a system of reservations in the US Congress? If yes, why and for which communities? If no, why not? Can we draw the following conclusions from the information given in this chapter? Give two facts to support your position for each of a Election Commission of India does not have enough powers to conduct free and fair elections in the country. b There is a high level of popular participation in the elections in c It is very easy for the party in power to win an election. d Many reforms are needed to make our elections completely free Chinappa was convicted for torturing his wife for dowry. Satbir was held guilty of practicing untouchability. The court did not allow either of them to contest elections. Does this decision go against the principles of democratic elections? Here are some reports of electoral malpractices from different parts of the world. Is there anything that these countries can learn from India to improve their elections? What would you suggest in each case? a During an election in Nigeria, the officer in charge of counting votes deliberately increased the votes of one candidate and declared Proportion of the community (in per cent) in the Population of US him elected. The court later found out that more than five lakh votes cast for one candidate were counted in favour of another. b Just before elections in Fiji, a pamphlet was distributed warning voters that a vote for former Prime Minister, Mahendra Chaudhry will lead to bloodshed. This was a threat to voters of Indian origin. c In the US, each state has its own method of voting, its own procedure of counting and its own authority for conducting elections. Authorities in the state of Florida took many controversial decisions that favoured Mr. Bush in the presidential elections in 2000. But no one could change those decisions. Here are some reports of malpractices in Indian elections. Identify what the problem in each case is. What should be done to correct the a Following the announcement of elections, the minister promised to provide financial aid to reopen the closed sugar mill. b Opposition parties alleged that their statements and campaign was not given due attention in Doordarshan and All India Radio. c An inquiry by the Election Commission showed that electoral rolls of a state contain name of 20 lakh fake voters. d The hoodlums of a political party were moving with guns, physically preventing supporters of other political parties to meet the voters and attacking meetings of other parties. Ramesh was not in class when this chapter was being taught. He came the next day and repeated what he had heard from his father. Can you tell Ramesh what is wrong with these statements? a Women always vote the way men tell them to. So what is the point of giving them the right to vote? b Party politics creates tension in society. Elections should be decided by consensus not by competition. c Only graduates should be allowed to stand as candidates for Assembly elections are usually held every year in a few states of the country. You can collect information about the elections that take place during this session. While collecting news items, divide these into three < Important events that took place before the election   main agenda discussed by political parties; information about people s demand; role of the Election Commission. < Important events on the day of the election and counting   turnout in elections; reports of malpractice; re-polls; the types of predictions made; and the final outcome. < Post elections   reasons offered by political parties for winning or losing elections; analysis of the election verdict by the media; selection of the Chief Minister. Is Electoral Literacy Club (ELC) functioning in your school? For details about Systematic Voters  Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP) programme of the Election Commission of India, How did your school celebrate the National Voters  Day on 25th January? Did you take the NVD Pledge? National Voters  Day (NVD) Pledge We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in democracy, hereby pledge to uphold the democratic traditions of our country and the dignity of free, fair and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election fearlessly and without being influenced by considerations of religion, race, caste, community, language or any inducement. The tableau of the Election Commission of India passes through the Rajpath, New Delhi, on the occasion of the 67th Republic Day Parade in 2016. Democracy is not just about people electing their rulers. In a democracy the rulers have to follow some rules and procedures. They have to work with and within institutions. This chapter is about the working of such institutions in a democracy. We try to understand this by looking at the manner in which major decisions are taken and implemented in our country. We also look at how disputes regarding these decisions are resolved. In this process we come across three institutions that play a key role in major decisions   legislature, executive and judiciary. You have already read something about these institutions in earlier classes. Here we shall quickly summarise those and move on to asking larger questions. In the case of each institution we ask: What does this institution do? How is this institution connected to other institutions? What makes its functioning more or less democratic? The basic objective here is to understand how all these institutions together carry on the work of government. Sometimes we compare these with similar institutions in other democracies. In this chapter we take our examples from the working of the national level government called Central Government, Union Government, or just Government of India. While reading this chapter, you can think of and discuss examples from the working of the government in 4.1 HOW IS A MAJOR POLICY DECISION TAKEN? Pensions, signed the Order. It was quite short, barely one page. It looked like any ordinary circular or notice that you may have seen in school. The government issues hun- dreds of orders every day on differ- ent matters. But this one was very important and became a source of controversy for several years. Let us see how the decision was taken and what happened later. A Government Order A Government Order A Government Order A Government Order A Government Order On August 13, 1990, the Government of India issued an Order. It was called an Office Memorandum. Like all government orders, it had a num- ber and is known by that: O. M. No. 36012/31/90-Est (SCT), dated 13.8.1990. The Joint Secretary, an officer in the Department of Person- nel and Training in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS This Order announced a major policy decision. It said that 27 per cent of the vacancies in civil posts and services under the Government of India are reserved for the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBC). SEBC is another name for all those people who belong to castes that are considered backward by the government. The benefit of job res- ervation was till then available only to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Now a new third category called SEBC was introduced. Only persons who belong to backward classes were eligible for this quota of 27 per cent jobs. Others could not compete for these jobs. Who decided to issue this Memorandum? Clearly, such a big decision could not have been taken by the person who signed that document. The officer was merely implementing the instructions given by the Minister of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, of which the Department was a part. We can guess that such a major decision would have involved other major functionaries in our country. You have already read in the previous class about some of them. Let us go over some of the main points that you covered then: < President is the head of the state and is the highest formal authority in the country. < Prime Minister is the head of the government and actually exercises all governmental powers. He takes most of the decisions in the < Parliament consists of the President and two Houses, Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Prime Minister must have the support of a majority of Lok Sabha members. So, were all these people involved in this decision regarding the Office Memorandum? Let us find out. A C T I V I T Y < Which points, other than the ones mentioned above, do you recall about these institutions from the previous class? Discuss in class. < Can you think of a major decision made by your state government? How were the Gover- nor, the Council of Ministers, the state assem- bly and the courts involved in that decision? This Office Memorandum was the culmination of a long chain of events. The Government of India had appointed the Second Backward Classes Commission in 1979. It was headed by B.P. Mandal. Hence it was popularly called the Mandal Commission. It was asked to determine the criteria to identify the socially and educationally backward classes in India and recommend steps to be taken for their advancement. The Commission gave its Report in 1980 and made many recommendations. One of these  was that 27 per cent of government jobs be reserved for the socially and educationally backward classes. The Report and recommendations were discussed in the Parliament. parliamentarians and parties kept demanding the implementation of the Commission s recommendations. Then came the Lok Sabha election of 1989. In its election manifesto, the Janata Dal promised that if voted to power, it would implement the Mandal Commission report. The Janata Dal did form the government after this election. Its leader V. P. Singh became the Prime Minister. Several developments took place Now I can see clearly! That is why they talk of politics. Don t they? Is every Office decision? If not, what made this were full of different views and opinions on this issue. It led to widespread protests and counter- protests, some of which were violent. People reacted strongly because this decision affected thousands of job opportunities. Some felt that existence of inequalities among people of different castes in India necessitated job reservations. They felt, this would give a fair opportunity to those communities who so far had not adequately been Others felt that this was unfair as it would deny equality of opportunity to those who did not belong to backward communities. They would be denied jobs even though they could be more qualified. Some felt that this would perpetuate caste feelings among people and hamper national unity. In this chapter we won t discuss whether the decision was good or not. We only take this example to understand how major implemented in the country. Who resolved this dispute? You know that the Supreme Court and the High Courts in India settle disputes arising out of governmental decisions. Some persons and associations opposed to this order filed a number of cases in the courts. They appealed to the courts to declare the order invalid and stop its implementation. The Supreme Court of India bunched all these cases together. This case was known as the  Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case. Eleven judges of the Supreme Court heard arguments of both sides. By a majority, the Supreme Court judges in 1992 declared that this order of the Government of India was valid. At the same time the Supreme Court asked the government to modify its WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS < The President of India in his address to the Parliament announced the intention of the government to implement the recommendations of the Mandal < On 6 August 1990, the Union Cabinet took a formal decision to implement the recommendations. < Next day Prime Minister V.P. Singh informed the Parliament about this decision through a statement in both the Houses of Parliament. < The decision of the Cabinet was sent to the Department of Personnel and Training. The senior officers of the Department drafted an order in line with the Cabinet decision and took the minister s approval. An officer signed the order on behalf of the Union Government. This was how O.M. No. 36012/ 31/90 was born on 13 August 1990. For the next few months, this was the most hotly debated issue in the country. Newspapers and magazines was such an important issue during advertisers used this theme to sell their products. Can you spot some references to political events and debates in these Amul Who did what in this case of reservations for backward classes? Made formal announcement about this decision Implemented the decision by issuing an order Took the decision to give 27% job reservations Upheld reservations as valid original order. It said that well-to- do persons among the backward classes should be excluded from getting the benefit of reservation. Accordingly, the Department of are at work in the running of your school? Would it be better if one person alone took all the decisions Personnel and Training issued another Office Memorandum on 8 September 1993. The dispute thus came to an end and this policy has been followed since then. d for P or Political Institutions We have seen one example of how the government works. Governing a country involves various such government is responsible for ensuring security to the citizens and providing facilities for education and health to all. It collects taxes and spends the money thus raised on administration, defence and formulates and implements several welfare schemes. Some persons have to take decisions on how to go about these activities. Others have to implement these decisions. If disputes arise on these decisions or in their implementation, there should be someone to determine what is right and what is wrong. It is important that everyone should know who is responsible for doing what. It is also important that these activities keep taking place even if the persons in key positions change. So, to attend to all these tasks, several arrangements are made in all modern democracies. Such arrangements are called institutions. A democracy works well when these institutions perform functions assigned to them. The Constitution of any country lays down basic rules on the powers and functions of each institution. In the example above, we saw several such institutions at work. < The Prime Minister and the Cabinet are institutions that take all important policy decisions. < The Civil Servants, working together, are responsible for taking steps to implement the < Supreme Court is an institution where disputes between citizens and the government are finally Can you think of some other insti- tutions in this example? What is Working with institutions is not easy. Institutions involve rules and regulations. This can bind the hands of leaders. Institutions involve meetings, committees and routines. This often leads to delays and complications. Therefore dealing with institutions can be frustrating. One might feel that it is much better to have one person take all decisions without any rules, procedures and meetings. But that is not the spirit of democracy. Some of the delays and complications introduced by institutions are very useful. They provide an opportunity for a wider set of people to be consulted in any decision. Institutions make it difficult to have a good decision taken very quickly. But they also make it equally difficult to rush class and try to imagine what Parliament could have done if it did not approve of the Cabinet s hy do w y do w y do w y do w y do we nee e need a In all democracies, an assembly of elected representatives exercises supreme political authority on behalf of the people. In India such a national assembly of elected representatives is called Parliament. At the state level this is called Legislature or Legislative Assembly. The name may vary in different countries, but such an assembly exists in every democracy. It exercises political authority on behalf of the people in many ways: 1 Parliament is the final authority for making laws in any country. This task of law making or legislation is so crucial that these assemblies are called legislatures. Parliaments all over the world can make new laws, change existing laws, or abolish existing laws and make new ones in their place. 2 Parliaments all over the world exercise some control over those who run the government. In some countries like India this control is direct and full. Those who run the government can take decisions only so long as they enjoy support 3 Parliaments control all the money that governments have. In most countries the public money can be spent only when Parliament through a bad decision. That is why democratic governments insist on In the example of the Office Memorandum, do you remember the role of Parliament? Perhaps not. Since this decision was not taken by Parliament, you might think that Parliament had no role in it. But let us go back to the story and see whether Parliament figures in it. Let us recall the points made earlier by completing the following sentences: < The Report of the Mandal Commission was discussed   < The President of India mentioned this in his   < The Prime Minister made a   The decision was not directly taken in Parliament. But Parliamentary discussions on the Report influenced and shaped the decision of the government. They brought pressure on the government to act on the Parliament was not in favour of this decision, the Government could not have gone ahead with it. Can you guess why? Recall what you read about Parliament in the earlier WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 4 Parliament is the highest forum of discussion and debate on public issues and national policy in any country. Parliament can seek information about any matter. o Houses of P ouses of P ouses of P ouses of P ouses of Par Since Parliament plays a central role in modern democracies, most large countries divide the role and powers of Parliament in two parts. They are called Chambers or Houses. One House is usually directly elected by the people and exercises the real power on behalf of the people. The second House is usually elected indirectly and performs some special functions. The most common work for the second House is to look after the interests of various states, regions or federal units. In our country, Parliament consists of two Houses. The two Houses are known as the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and the House of the People (Lok Sabha). The President of India is a part of Parliament, although she is not a member of either House. That is why all laws made in the Houses come into force only after they receive the assent of the President. You have read about the Indian Parliament in earlier classes. From the Chapter 3 you know how Lok Sabha elections take place. Let us recall some key differences between the composition of these two Houses of Parliament. Answer the following for the Lok Sabha and the Rajya < What is the total number of < Who elects the members?   < What is the length of the term (in < Can the House be dissolved or is it permanent?   What is the point in having so much discussion in the we know that the view of the ruling party is going to Which of the two Houses is more powerful? It might appear that the Rajya Sabha is more powerful, for sometimes it is called the  Upper Chamber  and the Lok Sabha the  Lower Chamber. But this does not mean that Rajya Sabha is more powerful than Lok Sabha. This is just an old style of speaking and not Our Constitution does give the Rajya Sabha some special powers over the states. But on most matters, the Lok Sabha exercises supreme power. Let us see how: 1 Any ordinary law needs to be passed by both the Houses. But if there is a difference between the two Houses, the final decision is taken in a joint session in which members of both the Houses sit together. Because of the larger number of members, the view of the Lok Sabha is likely to prevail in such a meeting. 2 Lok Sabha exercises more powers in money matters. Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept A C T I V I T Y When Parliament is in session, there is a special programme everyday on Doordarshan about the proceedings in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Watch the proceedings or read about it in the newspapers and note the following: < Powers of the two Houses of Parliament. < Role of the Speaker. < Role of the Opposition. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS A day in the life of the Lok Sabha Railways in addition to that sanctioned in the The Minister of Human Resource Development introduced the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Bill, 2004. He also gave a statement explaining why the government had to bring an ordinance for this. 12:14 Several members highlighted some issues, including: < The vindictiveness of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in registering cases against some leaders in the Tehelka case. < Need to include Rajasthani as an official language in the Constitution. < Need to renew the insurance policies of farmers and agricultural workers of Andhra 2:26 Two bills proposed by the government were considered and passed. These were: < The Securities Laws (Amendment) Bill < The Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws (Amendment) Bill 4:00 Finally, there was a long discussion regarding the foreign policy of the government and the need to continue an independent foreign policy in the context of the situation in Iraq. 7:17 Discussion concluded. House adjourned for next day. 3 Most importantly, the Lok Sabha controls the Council of Ministers. Only a person who enjoys the support of the majority of the members in the Lok Sabha is appointed the Prime Minister. If the majority of the Lok Sabha members say they have  no confidence  in the Council of Ministers, all ministers including the Prime Minister, have to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not have this power. 7 December 2004 was an ordinary day in the life of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. Let us take a look at what happened in the course of that day. Identify the role and powers of the parliament on the basis of the proceedings for the day as given below. You can also enact this day in your classroom. 11:00 Various ministries gave written answers to about 250 questions that were asked by members. These included: < What is the government s policy on talking to militant groups in Kashmir? < What are the figures of atrocities against Scheduled Tribes, including those inflicted by < What is the government doing about over- pricing of medicines by big companies? 12:00 A large number of official documents were presented and were available for discussion. These < Recruitment rules for the Indo-Tibetan Border < Annual Report of the Indian Institute of < Report and accounts of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 12:02 The Minister of Development of North Eastern Region made a statement regarding Revitalisation of the North Eastern Council. The Minister of State for Railways presented a statement showing the grant needed by the 4.3 POLITICAL EXECUTIVE Do you remember the story of the Office Memorandum with which we started this chapter? We found out that the person who signed the document did not take this decision. He was only executing the policy decision taken by someone else. We noted the role of the Prime Minister in taking that decision. But we also know that he could not have taken that decision if he did not have support from the Lok Sabha. In that sense he was only executing the wishes of the Parliament. Thus, at different levels of any government we find functionaries who take day-to-day decisions but do not exercise supreme power on behalf of the people. All those functionaries are collectively known as the executive. They are called executive because they are in charge of the  execution  of the policies of the government. Thus, when we talk about  the government  we usually mean the executive. Political and P olitical and P olitical and P olitical and P olitical and Per In a democratic country, two categories make up the executive. One that is elected by the people for a specific period, is called the political executive. Political leaders who take the big decisions fall in this category. In the second category, people are  appointed on a long-term basis. This is called the permanent executive or civil services. Persons working in civil services are called civil servants. They remain in office even when the ruling party changes. These officers work under political executive and assist them in carrying out the day-to-day administration. Can you recall the role of political and non-political executive in the case of the Office You might ask: Why does the political executive have more power than the non-political executive? Why is the minister more powerful than the civil servant? The civil servant is usually more educated and has more expert knowledge of the subject. The advisors working in the Finance Ministry know more about economics than the Finance Minister. Sometimes the ministers may know very little about the technical matters that come under their ministry. This could easily happen in ministries like Defence, Industry, Health, Science and Technology, Mines, etc. Why should the minister have the final say on The reason is very simple. In a democracy the will of the people is supreme. The minister is an elected representative of the people and thus empowered to exercise the will of the people on their behalf. She is finally answerable to the people for all the consequences of her decision. That is why the minister takes all the final decisions. The minister decides the overall framework and objectives in which decisions on policy should be made. The minister is not, and is not expected to be, an expert in the matters of her ministry. The minister takes the advice of experts on all technical matters. But very often experts hold different opinions or place before her more than one option. Depending on what the overall objective is, the minister Actually this happens in any large organisation. Those who understand the overall picture take the most important decisions, not the experts. The experts can tell the route, but someone with a larger view decides the destination. In a democracy elected ministers perform this role. inister and C er and C er and C er and C er and Council Prime Minister is the most important political institution in the country. Yet there is no direct election to the post of the Prime Minister. The President appoints the Prime Minister. But the President cannot appoint anyone she likes. The President appoints the leader of the majority party or the coalition of parties that commands a majority in the Lok Sabha, as Prime Minister. In case no single party or alliance gets a majority, the President appoints the person most likely to secure a majority support. The Prime Minister does not have a fixed tenure. He continues in power so long as he remains the leader of the majority party or coalition. After the appointment of the Prime Minister, the President appoints other ministers on the advice of the Prime Minister. The Ministers are usually from the party or the coalition that has the majority in the Lok Sabha. The Prime Minister is free to choose ministers, as long as they are members of Parliament. Sometimes, a person who is not a member of Parliament can also become a minister. But such a person has to get elected to one of the Houses of Parliament within six months of appointment as minister. Council of Ministers is the official name for the body that includes all the Ministers. It usually has 60 to 80 Ministers of different ranks. < Cabinet Ministers are usually top- level leaders of the ruling party or parties who are in charge of the major ministries. Usually the Cabinet Ministers meet to take decisions in the name of the Council of Ministers. Cabinet is thus the inner ring of the Council of Ministers. It comprises about 25 < Ministers of State with indepen- dent charge are usually in-charge of smaller Ministries. They participate in the Cabinet meet- ings only when specially invited. < Ministers of State are attached to and required to assist Cabinet Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. That is why parliamentary democracy in most countries is often known as the Cabinet form of government. The Cabinet works as a team. The ministers may have different views and opinions, but everyone has to own up to every decision of the Cabinet. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS The race to become minister is not new. Here is a cartoon aspirants waiting to get a berth in Nehru s Cabinet after the 1962 elections. Why do you think political leaders are so keen to  Shankar. Don t Spare Me No minister can openly criticise any decision of the government, even if it is about another Ministry or Department. Every ministry has secretaries, who are civil servants. The secretaries provide the necessary background information to the ministers to take decisions. The Cabinet as a team is assisted by the Cabinet Secretariat. This includes many senior civil servants who try to coordinate the working of A C T I V I T Y < List the names of five Cabinet Ministers and their ministries each at the Union level and in < Meet the Mayor or Municipal Chairperson of your town or the President of Zilla Parishad of your district and ask him or her about how the city, town or district is administered. wers of the ers of the ers of the ers of the ers of the The Constitution does not say very much about the powers of the Prime Minister or the ministers or their relationship with each other. But as head of the government, the Prime Minister has wide ranging powers. He chairs Cabinet meetings. He coordinates the work of different Departments. His decisions are final in case disagreements arise between Departments. He exercises general supervision of different ministries. All ministers work under his leadership. The Prime Minister distributes and redistributes work to the ministers. He also has the power to dismiss ministers. When the Prime Minister quits, the entire Thus, if the Cabinet is the most powerful institution in India, within the Cabinet it is the Prime Minister who is the most powerful. The powers of the Prime Minister in all parliamentary democracies of the world have increased so much in recent decades that parliamentary democracies are some times seen as government. As political parties have come to play a major role in politics, the Prime Minister controls the Cabinet and Parliament through the party. The media also contributes to this trend by making politics and elections as a competition between top leaders of parties. In India too we have seen such a tendency towards the concentration of powers in the hands of the Prime Minister. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, exercised enormous authority because he had great influence over the public. Indira Gandhi was also a very powerful leader compared to her colleagues in the Cabinet. Of course, the extent of power wielded by a Prime Minister also depends on the personality of the person holding However, in recent years the rise of coalition politics has imposed certain constraints on the power of the Prime Minister. The Prime This cartoon depicts a cabinet meeting chaired by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in early 1970s, at the peak of her popularity. Do you think similar cartoons could be drawn about other prime ministers who  R.K. Laxman, The Times of India Minister of a coalition government cannot take decisions as he likes. He has to accommodate different groups and factions in his party as well as among alliance partners. He also has to heed to the views and positions of the coalition partners and other parties, on whose support the survival of the government While the Prime Minister is the head of the government, the President is the head of the State. In our political system the head of the State exercises only nominal powers. The President of India is like the Queen of Britain whose functions are to a large extent ceremonial. The President supervises the overall functioning of all the political institutions in the country so that they operate in harmony to achieve the objectives of the State. The President is not elected directly by the people. The elected Members of Parliament (MPs) and the elected Assemblies (MLAs) elect her. A candidate standing for President s post has to get a majority of votes to win the election. This ensures that the President can be seen to represent the entire nation. At the same time the President can never claim the kind of direct popular mandate that the Prime Minister can. This ensures that she remains only a nominal executive. The same is true of the powers of the President. If you casually read the Constitution you would think that there is nothing that she cannot do. All governmental activities take place in the name of the President. All laws and major policy decisions of the government are issued in her name. All major appointments are made in the name of the President. These include the appointment of Why does this book refer to the President as  she ? Have we ever had a woman President in our country? Did you protest when the book referred to the Prime Minister as  he ? Have we not had a woman Why should we assume that all the are held by men? WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Shri Ram Nath Kovind administering the oath of office of the Prime Minister to Shri Narendra Modi, at a Swearing-in Ceremony, at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 30 May 2019. Press Information Bureau the Chief Justice of India, the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts of the states, the Governors of the states, the Election Commissioners, ambassadors to other countries, etc. All international treaties and agreements are made in the name of the President. The commander of the defence forces of But we should remember that the President exercises all these powers only on the advice of the Council of Ministers. The President can ask the Council of Ministers to reconsider its advice. But if the same advice is given again, she is bound to act according to it. Similarly, a bill passed by the Parliament becomes a law only after the President gives assent to it. If the President wants, she can delay this for some time and send the bill back to Parliament for reconsideration. But if Parliament passes the bill again, she has to So you may wonder what does the President really do? Can she do anything on her own at all? There is one very important thing she should do on her own: appoint the Prime Minister. When a party or coalition of parties secures a clear majority in the elections, the President, has to appoint the leader of the majority party or the coalition that enjoys majority support in the Lok Sabha. When no party or coalition gets a majority in the Lok Sabha, the President exercises her discretion. The President appoints a leader who in her opinion can muster majority support in the Lok Sabha. In such a case, the President can ask the newly appointed Prime Minister to prove majority support in the Lok Sabha within a specified time. The Presidential System Presidents all over the world are not always nomi- nal executives like the President of India. In many countries of the world, the President is both the head of the state and the head of the government. The President of the United States of America is the most well known example of this kind of Presi- dent. The US President is directly elected by the people. He personally chooses and appoints all Ministers. The law making is still done by the leg- islature (called the Congress in the US), but the president can veto any law. Most importantly, the president does not need the support of the major- ity of members in the Congress and neither is he answerable to them. He has a fixed tenure of four years and completes it even if his party does not have a majority in the Congress. This model is followed in most of the countries of Latin America and many of the ex-Soviet Union countries. Given the centrality of the President, this system of government is called the Presiden- tial form of government. In countries like ours that follow the British model, the parliament is su- preme. Therefore our system is called the parlia- mentary system of government. Eliamma, Annakutti and Marymol read the section on the President. Each of them had a question. Can you help them in answering these questions? Eliamma: What happens if the President and the Prime Minister disagree about some policy? Does the view of the Prime Minister always prevail? Annakutti:I find it funny that the President is the Supreme Commander of Armed Forces. I doubt if the President can even lift a heavy gun. What is the point in making the President the Com- Marymol: I would say, what is the point in having a President at all if all the real powers are with the What is better for a Prime Minister who can do whatever he wishes or a Prime Minister who needs to consult other leaders and 4.4 THE JUDICIARY A C T I V I T Y Follow the news about any major court case in a High Court or the Supreme Court. What was the original verdict? Did the High Court or the Supreme Court change it? What was the reason? This is why an independent and powerful judiciary is considered essential for democracies. All the courts at different levels in a country put together are called the judiciary. The Indian judiciary consists of a Supreme Court for the entire nation, High Courts in the states, District Courts and the courts at local level. India has an integrated judiciary. It means the Supreme Court controls the judicial administration in the country. Its decisions are binding on all other courts of the country. It can take up any dispute < Between citizens of the country; < Between citizens and government; < Between two or more state < Between governments at the union and state level. It is the highest court of appeal in civil and criminal cases. It can hear appeals against the decisions of the Independence of the judiciary means that it is not under the control of the legislature or the executive. The judges do not act on the direction of the government or according to the wishes of the party in power. That is why all modern democracies have courts that are independent of the legislature and the executive. India has achieved this. The judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister and in WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Let us return, one final time, to the story of Office Memorandum that we started with. This time let us not recall the story, but imagine how different the story could have been. Remember, the story came to a satisfactory end because the Supreme Court gave a verdict that was accepted by everyone. Imagine what would have happened in the < If there was nothing like a Supreme Court in the country. < Even if there was a Supreme Court, if it had no power to judge actions of the government. < Even if it had the power, if no one trusted the Supreme Court to give a fair verdict. < Even if it gave a fair judgement, if those who appealed against the Government Order did not accept It is quite common in the US for judges to be nominated on the basis of well-known political opinions and appeared in the US in 2005 when President Bush was considering various candidates for nomination to the US supreme court. What does this cartoon say independence of the judiciary? Why do such cartoons not appear in our country? Does this independence of our  M.E. Cohen, National, Cagle Cartoons Inc. consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. In practice it now means that the senior judges of the Supreme Court select the new judges of the Supreme Court and the is very little scope for interference by the political executive. The senior most judge of the Supreme Court is usually appointed the Chief Justice. Once a person is appointed as judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court it is nearly impossible to remove him or her from that position. It is as difficult as removing the President of India. A judge can be removed only by an impeachment motion passed separately by two-thirds members of the two Houses of the Parliament. It has never happened in the history of Indian democracy. The judiciary in India is also one of the most powerful in the world. The Supreme Court and the High Courts have the power to interpret the Constitution of the country. They can declare invalid any law of the legislature or the actions of the executive, whether at the Union level or at the state level, if they find such a law or action is against the Constitution. Thus they can determine the Constitutional validity of any legislation or action of the executive in the country, when it is challenged before them. This is known as the judicial review. The Supreme Court of India has also ruled that the core or basic principles of the Constitution cannot be changed by the Parliament. The powers and the independence of the Indian judiciary allow it to act as the guardian of the Fundamental Rights. We shall see in the next chapter that the citizens have a right to approach the courts to seek remedy in case of any violation of their rights. In recent years the judgments and directives to protect public interest and human rights. Any one can approach the courts if public interest is hurt by the actions of government. This is called public interest litigation. The courts intervene to prevent the misuse of the government s power to make decisions. They check malpractices on the part of public officials. That is why the judiciary enjoys a high level of confidence among the people. Give one reason each to argue that Indian judiciary is independent with respect to: Appointment of judges:   Removal of judges:   Powers of the judiciary:   Why are people allowed to go to courts against the The Chief Justice of India, Shri Justice J.S. Khehar administering the oath of the office of the President of India to Shri Ram Nath Kovind, at a swearing-in ceremony in the Central Hall of Parliament in New Delhi on 25 July 2017. Coalition government: A government formed by an alliance of two or more political parties, usually when no single party enjoys majority support of the members in a legislature. Executive: A body of persons having authority to initiate major policies, make decisions and implement them on the basis of the Constitution and laws of the country. Government: A set of institutions that have the power to make, implement and interpret laws so as to ensure an orderly life. In its broad sense, government administers and supervises over citizens and resources of a Judiciary: An institution empowered to administer justice and provide a mechanism for the resolution of legal disputes. All the courts in the country are collectively referred to as judiciary. Legislature: An assembly of people s representatives with the power to enact laws for a country. In addition to enacting laws, legislatures have authority to raise taxes and adopt the budget and other money bills. Office Memorandum: A communication issued by an appropriate authority stating the policy or decision of the government. Political Institution: A set of procedures for regulating the conduct of government and political life in the country. Reservations: A policy that declares some positions in government employment and educational institutions  reserved  for people and communities who have been discriminated against, are disadvantaged and State: Political association occupying a definite territory, having an organised government and possessing power to make domestic and foreign policies. Governments may change, but the state continues. In common speech, the terms country, nation and state are used as synonyms. If you are elected as the President of India which of the following decision can you take on your own? a Select the person you like as Prime Minister. b Dismiss a Prime Minister who has a majority in Lok Sabha. c Ask for reconsideration of a bill passed by both the Houses. d Nominate the leaders of your choice to the Council of Ministers. Who among the following is a part of the political executive? a District Collector b Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs c Home Minister d Director General of Police Which of the following statements about the judiciary is false? a Every law passed by the Parliament needs approval of the Supreme b Judiciary can strike down a law if it goes against the spirit of the c Judiciary is independent of the Executive d Any citizen can approach the courts if her rights are violated WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Which of the following institutions can make changes to an existing law of the country? a The Supreme Court b The President c The Prime Minister d The Parliament Match the ministry with the news that the ministry may have released: A new policy is being made to increase the jute exports from Telephone services will be made more accessible to rural areas. The price of rice and wheat sold under the Public Distribution System will go down. A pulse polio campaign will be The allowances of the soldiers posted on high altitudes will Ministry of Defence Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Public Distribution Ministry of Health Ministry of Commerce Ministry of Communications and Information Technology Of all the institutions that we have studied in this chapter, name the one that exercises the powers on each of the following matters. a Decision on allocation of money for developing infrastructure like roads, irrigation etc. and different welfare activities for the citizens b Considers the recommendation of a Committee on a law to regulate the stock exchange c Decides on a legal dispute between two state governments d Implements the decision to provide relief for the victims of an Why is the Prime Minister in India not directly elected by the people? Choose the most appropriate answer and give reasons for your choice. a In a Parliamentary democracy only the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha can become the Prime Minister. b Lok Sabha can remove the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers even before the expiry of their term. c Since the Prime Minister is appointed by the President there is no need for it. d Direct election of the Prime Minister will involve lot of expenditure Three friends went to watch a film that showed the hero becoming Chief Minister for a day and making big changes in the state. Imran said this is what the country needs. Rizwan said this kind of a personal rule without institutions is dangerous. Shankar said all this is a fantasy. No minister can do anything in one day. What would be your reaction to such a film? A teacher was making preparations for a mock parliament. She called two students to act as leaders of two political parties. She gave them an option: Each one could choose to have a majority either in the mock Lok Sabha or in the mock Rajya Sabha. If this choice was given to you, which one would you choose and why? After reading the example of the reservation order, three students had different reactions about the role of the judiciary. Which view, according to you, is a correct reading of the role of judiciary? a Srinivas argues that since the Supreme Court agreed with the government, it is not independent. b Anjaiah says that judiciary is independent because it could have given a verdict against the government order. The Supreme Court did direct the government to modify it. c Vijaya thinks that the judiciary is neither independent nor conformist, but acts as a mediator between opposing parties. The court struck a good balance between those who supported and those who opposed the order. Collect newspapers for the last one week and classify the news related to the working of any of the institutions discussed in this chapter into four < Working of the legislatures < Working of the political executive < Working of the civil services < Working of the judiciary WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS In the previous two chapters we have looked at two major elements of a democratic government. In Chapter 3 we saw how a democratic government has to be periodically elected by the people in a free and fair manner. In Chapter 4 we learnt that a democracy must be based on institutions that follow certain rules and procedures. These elements are necessary but not sufficient for a democracy. Elections and institutions need to be combined with a third element   enjoyment of rights   to make a government democratic. Even the most properly elected rulers working through the established institutional process must learn not to cross some limits. Citizens  democratic rights set those limits in a democracy. This is what we take up in this final chapter of the book. We begin by discussing some real life cases to imagine what it means to live without rights. This leads to a discussion on what we mean by rights and why do we need them. As in the previous chapters, the general discussion is followed by a focus on India. We discuss one by one the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution. Then we turn to how these rights can be used by ordinary citizens. Who will protect and enforce them? Finally we take a look at how the scope of rights has been expanding. Dear Mr Tony Blair, Firstly, how are you? I sent a letter two years ago, why didn t you reply?!? I was waiting for a long time but you did not reply. Please can you give me an answer to my question? Why is my dad in prison? Why is he far away in that Guant namo Bay?! I miss my dad so much. I have not seen my dad for three years. I know my dad has not done anything, because he is a good man. I hear everybody speak about my dad in a nice way. Your children spend Christmas with you, but me and my brothers, and sisters have spent Eid alone without our dad for 3 years. What do you think I hope you will answer me this From: Anas Jamil El-Banna, 9 years old. 5.1 LIFE WITHOUT RIGHTS Constitution because   Chapter 3: Every adult citizen of India has the right to... and to be... Chapter 4: If a law is against the Constitution, every citizen has the right to approach   Let us now begin with three examples of what it means to live in the absence of rights. rison in G ison in G ison in G ison in G ison in Guan About 600 people were secretly picked up by the US forces from all over the world and put in a prison in Guantanamo Bay, an area near Cuba controlled by Amercian Navy. Anas s father, Jamil El-Banna, was among them. The American government said that they were enemies of the US and linked to the attack on New York on 11 September 2001. In most cases the governments of their countries were not asked or even informed about their imprisonment. Like other prisoners, El-Banna s family got to know that he was in that prison only through the media. Families of prisoners, media or even UN representatives were not allowed to meet them. The US army arrested them, interrogated them and decided whether to keep them there or not. There was no trial before any magistrate in the US. Nor could these prisoners approach courts in their own country. organisation, collected information on the condition of the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay and reported that the prisoners were being tortured in ways that violated the US laws. They In this book we have mentioned rights again and again. If you remember, we have discussed rights in each of the four preceding chapters. Can you fill in the blanks by recalling the rights dimension in Chapter 1: A comprehensive definition of democracy includes   Chapter 2: Our Constitution makers believed that fundamental rights were being denied the treatment that even prisoners of war must get as per international treaties. Many prisoners had tried protesting against these conditions by going on a hunger strike. Prisoners were not released even after they were officially declared not guilty. An independent inquiry by the UN supported these findings. The UN Secretary General said the prison in Guantanamo Bay should be closed down. The US government refused to accept these pleas. The case of Guantanamo Bay looks like an exception, for it involves the government of one country denying rights to citizens of another country. Let us therefore look at the case of Saudi Arabia and the position of the citizens with regard to their government. Consider these facts: < The country is ruled by a hereditary king and the people have no role in electing or changing their rulers. < The king selects the legislature as well as the executive. He appoints the judges and can change any of < Citizens cannot form political par- ties or any political organisations. Media cannot report anything that the monarch does not like. < There is no freedom of religion. Every citizen is required to be Muslim. Non-Muslim residents can follow their religion in private, but not in public. < Women are subjected to many public restrictions. The testimony of one man is considered equal to that of two women. This is true not just of Saudi Arabia. There are many countries in the world where several of these thnic massacre in K e in K e in K e in K e in Koso You might think that this is possible in an absolute monarchy but not in countries which choose their rulers. Just consider this story from Kosovo. This was a province of Yugoslavia before its split. In this province the population was overwhelmingly ethnic Albanian. But in the entire country, Serbs were in majority. A narrow minded (pronounced Miloshevich) had won the election. His government was very hostile to the Kosovo Albanians. He wanted the Serbs to dominate the country. Many Serb leaders thought that Ethnic minorities like Albanians should either leave the country or accept the dominance of the Serbs. This is what happened to an Albanian family in a town in Kosovo in April 1999:  74-year-old Batisha Hoxha was sitting in her kitchen with her 77- year old husband, Izet, staying warm by the stove. They had heard explosions but did not realise that Serbian troops had already entered the town. The next thing she knew, five or six soldiers had burst through the front door and were demanding  Where are your children?    they shot Izet three times in the chest  recalled Batisha. With her husband dying before her, the soldiers pulled the wedding ring off her finger and told her to get out.  I was not even outside the gate when they burned the house    She was standing on the street in the rain with no house, no husband, no possessions but the clothes she was wearing.  This news report was typical of what happened to thousands of Albanians in that period. Do If you were a Serb, would you support what Milosevic did in Kosovo? Do you think his project of good for the remember that this massacre was being carried out by the army of their own country, working under the direction of a leader who came to power through democratic elections. This was one of the worst instances of killings based on ethnic prejudices in recent times. Finally several other countries intervened to stop this massacre. Milosevic lost power and was tried by the International Court of Justice for crimes against humanity. For each of the three cases of life without rights, mention an example from India. These could include the < Newspaper reports on custodial violence. < Newspaper reports on force-feeding of prisoners who go on hunger strike. < Ethnic massacre in any part of our country. < Reports regarding unequal treatment of women. List the similarities and differences between the earlier case and the Indian example. It is not necessary that for each of these cases you must find an exact Indian parallel. A C T I V I T Y < Write a letter to Anas Jamil in UK, describing your reactions after reading his letter to Tony < Write a letter from Batisha in Kosovo to a woman who faced a similar situation in < Write a memorandum on behalf of women in Saudi Arabia to the Secretary General of the Think of all the examples that we have discussed so far. Think of the victims in each example: the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay, women in Saudi Arabia, Albanians in Kosovo. If you were in their position, what would you have wished? If you could, what would you do to ensure that such things do not happen to anyone? You would perhaps desire a system where security, dignity and fair play are assured to everyone. You might want, for example, that no one should be arrested without proper reason and information. And if someone is arrested, he or she should have a fair chance to defend themselves. You might agree that such assurance cannot apply to everything. One has to be reasonable in what one expects and demands of everyone else, for one has to grant the same to everyone. But you might insist that the assurance does not remain on paper, that there is assurances, that those who violate these are punished. In other words, you might want a system where at least a minimum is guaranteed to everyone   powerful or weak, rich or poor, majority or minority. This is the spirit behind thinking about What are rights? What are rights? What are rights? What are rights? What are rights? Rights are claims of a person over other fellow beings, over the society and over the government. All of us 5.2 RIGHTS IN A DEMOCRACY want to live happily, without fear and without being subjected to degraded treatment. For this we expect others to behave in such a way that does not harm us or hurt us. Equally, our actions should not also harm or hurt others. So a right is possible when you make a claim that is equally possible for others. You cannot have a right that harms or hurts others. You cannot have a right to play a game in such a way that it breaks the neighbour s window. The Serbs in Yugoslavia could not have claimed the whole country for themselves. The claims we make should be reasonable. They should be such that can be made available to others in an equal measure. Thus, a right comes with an obligation to respect other rights. Just because we claim some thing it does not become our right. It has to be recognised by the society we live in. Rights acquire meaning only in society. Every society makes certain rules to regulate our conduct. They tell us what is right and what is wrong. What is recognised by the society as rightful becomes the basis of rights. That is why the notion of rights changes from time to time and society to society. Two hundred years ago anyone who said that women should have right to vote would have sounded strange. Today not granting them vote in Saudi Arabia appears When the socially recognised claims are written into law they acquire real force. Otherwise they remain merely as natural or moral Guantanamo Bay had a moral claim not to be tortured or humiliated. But they could not go to anyone to enforce this claim. When law recognises some claims they become enforceable. We can then demand their application. When fellow citizens or the government do not respect these rights we call it violation or infringement of our rights. In such circumstances citizens can approach courts to protect their rights. So, if we want to call any claim a right, it has to have these three qualities. Rights are reasonable claims of persons recognised by society and sanctioned by law. hy do w y do w y do w y do w y do we nee e need r ights in a ts in a ts in a ts in a ts in a Rights are necessary for the very sustenance of a democracy. In a democracy every citizen has to have the right to vote and the right to be elected to government. For democratic elections to take place, it is necessary that citizens should have the right to express their opinion, form political parties and take part in political activities. Rights also perform a very special role in a democracy. Rights protect minorities from the oppression of majority. They ensure that the majority cannot do whatever it likes. Rights are guarantees which can be used when things go wrong. Things may go wrong when some citizens may wish to take away the rights of others. This usually happens when those in majority want to dominate those in minority. The government should protect the citizens  rights in such a situation. But sometimes elected governments may not protect or may even attack the rights of their own citizens. That is why some rights need to be placed higher than the government, so that the government cannot violate them. In most democracies the basic rights of the citizen are written down in the What are the protecting or even attacking the rights of their own citizens? Why do they do that? 5.3 RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION t to E The Constitution says that the government shall not deny to any person in India equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws. It means that the laws apply in the same manner to all, regardless of a person s status. This is called the rule of law. Rule of law is the foundation of any democracy. It means that no person is above the law. There cannot be any distinction between a political leader, government official and an ordinary Every citizen, from the Prime Minister to a small farmer in a remote village, is subjected to the same laws. No person can legally claim any special treatment or privilege just because he or she happens to be an important person. For example, a few years ago a former Prime Minister of the country faced a court case on charges of cheating. The court finally declared that he was not guilty. But as long as the case continued, he had to go to the court, give evidence and file papers, just like any other citizen. This basic position is further clarified in the Constitution by spelling out some implications of the Right to Equality. The government shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Every citizen shall have access to public places like shops, restaurants, hotels, and cinema halls. Similarly, there shall be no restriction with regard to the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads, playgrounds and places of public resorts maintained by government or dedicated to the use of general public. This might appear very obvious, but it was necessary to democracies in the world, these rights are mentioned in the Constitution. Some rights which are fundamental to our life are given a special status. They are called Fundamental Rights. We have already read in Chapter 2 the preamble to our Constitution. It talks about securing for all its citizens equality, liberty and justice. Fundamental Rights put this promise into effect. They are an important basic feature of India s You already know our Constitution provides for six Fundamental Rights. Can you recall these? What exactly do these rights mean for an ordinary citizen? Let us look at these one by that the rich can have better lawyers in the courts. What is the point in F U N D A M E N T A L R I G H T S incorporate these rights in the Constitution of our country where the traditional caste system did not allow people from some communities to access all public places. The same principle applies to public jobs. All citizens have equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment or appointment to any position in the government. No citizen shall be discriminated against or made ineligible for employment on the grounds mentioned above. You have read in Chapter 4 that the Government of India has provided reservations for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. Various governments have different schemes for giving preference to handicapped in some kinds of jobs. Are these reservations against the right to equality? They are not. For equality does not mean giving everyone the same treatment, no matter what they need. Equality means giving everyone an equal opportunity to achieve whatever one is capable of. Sometimes it is necessary to give special treatment to someone in order to ensure equal opportunity. This is what job reservations do. Just to clarify this, reservations of this kind are not a violation of the Right to Equality. The principle of non-discrimination extends to social life as well. The Constitution mentions one extreme form of social discrimination, the practice of untouchability, and clearly directs the government to put an end to it. The practice of untouchability has been forbidden in any form. Untouchability here does not only mean refusal to touch people belonging to certain castes. It refers to any belief or social A C T I V I T Y < Go to the playground of the school or any sta- dium and watch a 400 metre race on any track. Why are the competitors in the outer lane placed ahead of those in the inner lane at the starting point of the race? What would happen if all the competitors start the race from the same line? Which of these two would be an equal and fair race? Apply this example to a competition for < Observe any big public building. Is there a ramp for physically handicapped? Are there any other facilities that make it possible for physically handicapped to use the building in the same way as any one else? Should these special fa- cilities be provided, if it leads to extra expendi- ture on the building? Do these special provi- sions go against the principle of equality? practice which looks down upon people on account of their birth with certain caste labels. Such practice denies them interaction with others or access to public places as equal citizens. So the Constitution made untouchability a punishable offence. t to F constraints. In practical life it means absence of interference in our affairs by others   be it other individuals or the government. We want to live in society, but we want to be free. We want to do things in the way we want to do them. Others should not dictate us what we should do. So, under the Indian Constitution all citizens have the right to < Freedom of speech and expression < Assembly in a peaceful manner < Form associations and unions < Move freely throughout the < Reside in any part of the country, < Practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or You should remember that every citizen has the right to all these freedoms. That means you cannot exercise your freedom in such a manner that violates others  right to freedom. Your freedoms should not cause public nuisance or disorder. You are free to do everything which injures no one else. Freedom is not unlimited licence to do what one wants. Accordingly, the government can impose certain reasonable restrictions on our freedoms in the larger interests of the society. expression is one of the essential features of any democracy. Our ideas and personality develop only when we are able to freely communicate with others. You may think differently from others. Even if a hundred people think in one way, you should have the freedom to think differently and express your views accordingly. You may disagree with a policy of government or activities of an association. You are free to criticise the government or the activities of conversations with parents, friends and relatives. You may publicise your views through a pamphlet, magazine or newspaper. You can do it through paintings, poetry or songs. However, you cannot use this freedom to instigate violence against others. You cannot use it to incite people to rebel against government. Many Forms of Untouchability In 1999, P. Sainath wrote a series of newsreports in The Hindu describing untouchability and caste discrimination that was still being practiced against Dalits or persons belonging to Scheduled Castes. He travelled to various parts of the coun- try and found that in many places: < Tea stalls kept two kinds of cups, one for Dalits one for others; < Barbers refused to serve dalit clients; < Dalit students were made to sit separately in the classroom or drink water from separate picher; < Dalit grooms were not allowed to ride a horse in the wedding procession; and < Dalits were not allowed to use common handpump or if they did, the handpump was washed to purify it. All these fall under the definition of untouchability. Can you think of some examples from your own extended to those who are spreading wrong and narrow- Should they be allowed to confuse Neither can you use it to defame others by saying false and mean things that cause damage to a Citizens have the freedom to hold meetings, processions, rallies and demonstrations on any issue. They may want to discuss a problem, exchange ideas, mobilise public support to a cause, or seek votes for a candidate or party in an election. But such meetings have to be peaceful. They should not lead to public disorder or breach of peace in society. Those who participate in these activities and meetings should not carry weapons with them. Citizens also can form associations. For example workers in a factory can form a workers  union to promote their interests. Some people in a town may come together to form an association to campaign against corruption or pollution. As citizens we have the freedom to travel to any part of the country. We are free to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India. Let us say a person who belongs to the state of Assam wants to start a business in Hyderabad. He may not have any connection with that city, he may not have even seen it ever. Yet as a citizen of India he has the right to set up base there. This right allows lakhs of people to migrate from villages to towns and from poorer regions of the countries to prosperous regions and big cities. The same freedom extends to choice of occupations. No one can force you to do or not to do a certain job. Women cannot be told that some kinds of occupations are not for them. People from deprived castes cannot be kept to their traditional The Constitution says that no person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. It means that no person can be killed unless the court has ordered a death sentence. It also means that a government or police officer cannot arrest or detain any citizen unless he has proper legal justification. Even when they do, they have to follow some procedures: < A person who is arrested and detained in custody will have to be informed of the reasons for such arrest and detention. < A person who is arrested and detained shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of 24 hours of arrest. < Such a person has the right to consult a lawyer or engage a lawyer for his defence. Let us recall the cases of Guantanamo Bay and Kosovo. The victims in both these cases faced a threat to the most basic of all individual life and personal liberty. Are these cases instances of violation of right to freedom? If yes, which constitutional provision does each of these violate? < The government of India banned Salman Rushdie s book Satanic Verses on the ground that it was disrespectful to Prophet Mohammed and was likely to hurt the feelings of Muslim community. < Every film has to be approved by the Censor Board of the government before it can be shown to the public. But there is no such restriction if the same story is published in a book or a magazine. < The government is considering a proposal that there will be industrial zones or sectors of economy where workers will not be allowed to form unions or go on strike. < City administration has imposed a ban on use of public microphones after 10 p.m. in view of the approaching secondary school examinations. ight against E t against E t against E t against E t against Exploita Once the right to liberty and equality is granted, it follows that every citizen has a right not to be exploited. Yet the Constitution makers thought is was necessary to write down certain clear provisions to prevent exploitation of the weaker sections of the society. The Constitution mentions three specific evils and declares these illegal. First, the Constitution prohibits  traffic in human beings. Traffic here means selling and buying of human beings, usually women, for immoral purposes. Second, our Constitution also prohibits forced labour or begar in any form. Begar is a practice where the worker is forced to render service to the  master  free of charge or at a nominal remuneration. When this practice takes place on a life-long basis, it is called the practice of Finally, the Constitution also prohibits child labour. No one can employ a child below the age of fourteen to work in any factory or mine or in any other hazardous work, such as railways and ports. Using this as a basis many laws have been made to prohibit children from working in industries such as beedi making, firecrackers and matches, printing and dyeing. On the basis of these news reports write a letter to the editor or a petition to a court highlighting the violation of right against exploitation: A petition was filed in the Madras High Court. The petitioner said a large number of children aged between seven and 12 were taken from villages in Salem district and sold at auctions at Olur Nagar in Kerala s Thrissur district. The petitioner requested the courts to order the government to check these facts. Children, from the age of five, were employed in the iron ore mines in the Hospet, Sandur and the Ikal areas in Karnataka. Children were forced to carry out digging, breaking stones, loading, dumping, transporting and processing of iron ore with no safety equipment, fixed wages and working hours. They handled a high-level of toxic wastes and were exposed to mine dust, which was above the permissible level. The school dropout rate in the region was very high. (May 2005) The latest annual survey conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation found that the number of female child labourers was growing both in rural and urban areas. The survey revealed there were 41 female child labourers per thousand worker population in rural areas as against the previous figure of 34 per thousand. The figure for male child had remained at 31. (April A C T I V I T Y Do you know what the minimum wages in your state are? If not, can you find out? Speak to five people doing different types of work in your neighbourhood and find out if they are earning the minimum wages or not. Ask them if they know what the minimum wages are. Ask them if men and women are getting the same wages. t to F eedom of R dom of R dom of R dom of R dom of Religion Right to freedom includes right to freedom of religion as well. In this case too, the Constitution makers were very particular to state it clearly. You have already read in Chapter 2 that India is a secular state. Most people in India, like anywhere else in the world, follow different religions. Some may not believe in any religion. Secularism is based on the idea that the state is concerned only with relations among human beings, and not with the relation between human beings and God. A secular state is one that does not establish any one religion as official religion. Indian secularism practices an attitude of a principled and equal distance from all religions. The state has to be neutral and impartial in dealing with Every person has a right to profess, practice and propagate the religion he or she believes in. Every religious group or sect is free to manage its religious affairs. A right to propagate one s religion, however, does not mean that a person has right to compel another person to convert into his religion by means of force, fraud, inducement or allurement. Of course, a person is free to change religion on his or her own will. Freedom to practice religion does not mean that a person can do whatever he wants in the name of religion. For example, one cannot sacrifice animals or human beings as offerings to supernatural forces or gods. Religious practices which treat women as inferior or those that infringe women s freedom are not allowed. For example, one cannot force a widow to shave head or wear A secular state is one that does not confer any privilege or favour on any particular religion. Nor does it pun- ish or discriminate against people on the basis of religion they follow. Thus the government cannot com- pel any person to pay any taxes for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious institution. There shall be no religious instruction in the govern- ment educational institutions. In educational institutions managed by private bodies no person shall be compelled to take part in any religious instruction or to attend any ultural and E al and E al and E al and E al and Educa You might wonder why the Constitution makers were so particular in providing written guarantees of the rights of the minorities. Why are there no special guarantees for the majority? Well, for the simple reason that the working of democracy gives power to the majority. It is the language, culture and religion of minorities that needs special protection. Otherwise, they may get neglected or undermined under the impact of the language, religion and culture of the majority. That is why the Constitution speci- fies the cultural and educational rights of the minorities: < Any section of citizens with a distinct language or culture have a right to conserve it. does not give religion. Then how can it give people the right to practise < Admission to any educational government aid cannot be denied to any citizen on the ground of religion or language. < All minorities have the right to es- tablish and administer educa- tional institutions of their choice. Here minority does not mean only religious minority at the national level. In some places people speaking a particular language are in majority; people speaking a different language are in a minority. For example, Telugu speaking people form a majority in Andhra Pradesh. But they are a minority in the neighbouring State of Karnataka. Sikhs constitute a majority in Punjab. But they are a minority in Rajasthan, Haryana and Read these news reports and identify the right that is being debated in each of these cases: < An emergency session of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC) rejected the proposal to form a separate body to manage the affairs of Sikh shrines in Haryana. It warned the government that the Sikh community would not tolerate any interference in their religious affairs. < The Allahabad High Court quashed the Central law, which gave Aligarh Muslim University its minority status, and held illegal the reservation of seats for Muslims in its postgraduate medical courses. < The Rajasthan Government has decided to enact an anti-conversion law. Christian leaders have said that the Bill would aggravate the sense of insecurity and fear in the minds of minorities. (March 2005) How can we secure How can we secure How can we secure How can we secure How can we secure If rights are like guarantees, they are of no use if there is no one to honour them. The fundamental rights in the Constitution are important because they are enforceable. We have a right to seek the enforcement of the above mentioned rights. This is called the Right to Constitutional Remedies. This itself is a Fundamental Right. This right makes other rights effective. It is possible that sometimes our rights may be violated by fellow citizens, private bodies or by the government. When any of our rights are violated we can seek remedy through courts. If it is a Fundamental Right we can directly approach the Supreme Court or the High Court of a state. That is why Dr. Ambedkar called the Right to Constitutional Remedies,  the heart and soul  of our Constitution. Can the President of India stop you the Supreme Court to secure your guaranteed against the actions of the Legislatures, the Executive, and any other authorities instituted by the government. There can be no law or action that violates the Fundamental Rights. If any act of the Legislature or the Executive takes away or limits any of the Fundamental Rights it will be invalid. We can challenge such laws governments, the policies and actions of the government or the governmental organisations like the nationalised banks or electricity boards. Courts also enforce the Fundamental Rights against private individuals and bodies. The Supreme Court and High Courts have the power to issue directions, orders or writs for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights. They can also award compensation to the victims and punishment to the violators. We have already seen in Chapter 4 that the judiciary in our country is independent of the government and the parliament. We also noted that our judiciary is very powerful and can do whatever is needed to protect the rights of the In case of any violation of a Fundamental Right the aggrieved person can go to a court for remedy. But now, any person can go to court against the violation of the Fundamental Right, if it is of social or public interest. It is called Public Interest Litigation (PIL). Under the PIL any citizen or group of citizens can approach the Supreme Court or a High Court for the protection of public interest against a particular law or action of the government. One can write to the judges even on a postcard. The court will take up the matter if the judges find it in public A C T I V I T Y Is there a State Human Rights Commission in your state? Find out about its activities. Write a petition to the NHRC if you know any instances of human rights violation in your area. National Human Rights Commission into any case of violation of human rights. It also inquires into any case of abetment of such violation or negligence in controlling it by any government officer and takes other general steps to promote human rights in the country. The Commission presents its findings and recommendations to the government or intervene in the court on behalf of the victims. It has wide ranging powers to carry out its inquiry. Like any court it can summon witnesses, question any government official, demand any official paper, visit any prison for inspection or send its own team for on-the-spot inquiry. Any citizen of India can write a letter to this address to complain against the violation of human rights: National Human Rights.O. Complex, INA, New Delhi 110023. There is no fee or anyformal procedure to approach the NHRC. Like NHRC, there are State Human Rights Commissions in all the 28 states of the country. For more details, visit http:/ Many cases of human rights violations in diverse fields are being brought to the public notice from across India. Human rights organisations and the media often criticise government agencies for not seriously pursuing these cases or catching the culprits. Someone had to intervene on behalf of the victims. This is where the National Human Rights Commission stepped in. This is an independent commission set up by law in 1993. Like judiciary, the Commission is independent of the government. The Commission is appointed by the President and includes retired judges, officers and eminent citizens. Yet it does not have the burden of deciding court cases. So it can focus on helping the victims secure their human rights. These include all the rights granted to the citizens by the Constitution. For NHRC human rights also include the rights mentioned in the UN sponsored international treaties that India has signed. The NHRC cannot by itself punish the guilty. That is the responsibility of courts. The NHRC is there to make independent and credible inquiry 5.4 EXPANDING SCOPE OF RIGHTS We began this chapter by discussing the significance of rights. In much of the chapter we have focussed only on Fundamental Rights in the Constitution. You might think that Fundamental Rights granted by the Constitution are the only rights citizen have. This is not true. While Fundamental Rights are the source of all rights, our Constitution and law offers a wider range of rights. Over the years the scope of rights Sometimes it leads to expansion in the legal rights that the citizen can enjoy. From time to time, the courts gave judgments to expand the scope of rights. Certain rights like right to information, and right to education are derived from the Fundamental Rights. Now school education has become a right for Indian citizens. The governments are responsible for providing free and compulsory education to all children up to the age of 14 years. Parliament has enacted a law giving the right to information to the citizens. This Act was made under the Fundamental Right to freedom of thought and expression. We have a right to seek information from government offices. Recently the Supreme Court has expanded the meaning of the right to life to include the right to food. Also, rights are not limited only enumerated in the Constitution. Constitution provides many more rights, which may not be Fundamental Rights. For example the right to property is not a Fundamental Right but it is a constitutional right. Right to vote in elections is an important Sometimes the expansion takes place in what is called human rights. These are universal moral claims that may or may not have been recognised by law. In that sense these claims are not rights going by the definition that we presented earlier. With the expansion of democracy all over the world, there is greater pressure on governments to accept these claims. Some international covenants have also contributed to the expansion of Thus the scope of rights has been expanding and new rights are evolving over time. They are result of struggle of the people. New rights emerge as societies develop or as new constitutions are made. The Constitution of South Africa guarantees its citizens several kinds of new rights: < Right to privacy, so that citizens or their home cannot be searched, their phones cannot be tapped, their communication cannot be < Right to an environment that is not harmful to their health or well- < Right to have access to adequate Are these rights only for adults? Which of these rights are available < Right to have access to health care services, sufficient food and water; no one may be refused emergency Many people think that the right to work, right to health, right to minimum livelihood and right to privacy should be made fundamental rights in India as well. What do you think? Amnesty International: An international organisation of volunteers who campaign for human rights. This organisation brings out independent reports on the violation of human rights all over Claim: Demand for legal or moral entitlements a person makes on fellow citizens, society or the Covenant: Promise made by individuals, groups or countries to uphold a rule or principle. It is legally binding on the signatories to the agreement or statement. Dalit: A person who belongs to the castes which were considered low and not touchable by others. Dalits are also known by other names such as the Scheduled Castes, Depressed International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural This international covenant recognises many rights that are not directly a part of the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution. This has not yet become an international treaty. But human right activists all over the world see this as a standard of human rights. These include: < right to work: opportunity to everyone to earn livelihood by working < right to safe and healthy working conditions, fair wages that can provide decent standard of living for the workers and their families < right to adequate standard of living including adequate food, clothing and housing < right to social security and insurance < right to health: medical care during illness, special care for women during childbirth and prevention of epidemics < right to education: free and compulsory primary education, equal access to higher education. Ethnic group: An ethnic group is a human population whose members usually identify with each other on the basis of a common ancestry. People of an ethnic group are united by cultural practices, religious beliefs and Traffic: Selling and buying of men, women or children for immoral Summon: An order issued by a court asking a person to appear before it. Writ: A formal document containing an order of the court to the government issued only by High Court or the Supreme Court. Which of the following is not an instance of an exercise of a a Workers from Bihar go to the Punjab to work on the farms b Christian missions set up a chain of missionary schools c Men and women government employees get the same salary d Parents  property is inherited by their children Which of the following freedoms is not available to an Indian citizen? a Freedom to criticise the government b Freedom to participate in armed revolution c Freedom to start a movement to change the government d Freedom to oppose the central values of the Constitution Which of the following rights is available under the Indian a Right to work b Right to adequate livelihood c Right to protect one s culture d Right to privacy Name the Fundamental Right under which each of the following rights a Freedom to propagate one s religion b Right to life c Abolition of untouchability d Ban on bonded labour Which of these statements about the relationship between democracy and rights is more valid? Give reasons for your preference. a Every country that is a democracy gives rights to its citizens. b Every country that gives rights to its citizens is a democracy. c Giving rights is good, but it is not necessary for a democracy. Are these restrictions on the right to freedom justified? Give reasons for your answer. a Indian citizens need permission to visit some border areas of the country for reasons of security. b Outsiders are not allowed to buy property in some areas to protect the interest of the local population. c The government bans the publication of a book that can go against the ruling party in the next elections. Manoj went to a college to apply for admission into an MBA course. The clerk refused to take his application and said  You, the son of a sweeper, wish to be a manager! Has anyone done this job in your community? Go to the municipality office and apply for a sweeper s position. Which of Manoj s fundamental rights are being violated in this instance? Spell these out in a letter from Manoj to the district When Madhurima went to the property registration office, the Registrar told her,  You can t write your name as Madhurima Banerjee d/o A. K. Banerjee. You are married, so you must give your husband s name. Your husband s surname is Rao. So your name should be changed to Madhurima Rao.  She did not agree. She said  If my husband s name has not changed after marriage, why should mine?  In your opinion who is right in this dispute? And why? Thousands of tribals and other forest dwellers gathered at Piparia in Hoshangabad district in Madhya Pradesh to protest against their proposed displacement from the Satpura National Park, Bori Wildlife Sanctuary and Panchmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary. They argue that such a displacement is an attack on their livelihood and beliefs. Government claims that their displacement is essential for the development of the area and for protection of wildlife. Write a petition on behalf of the forest dwellers to the NHRC, a response from the government and a report of the NHRC on this matter. Draw a web interconnecting different rights discussed in this chapter. For example right to freedom of movement is connected to the freedom of occupation. One reason for this is that freedom of movement enables a person to go to place of work within one s village or city or to another village, city or state. Similarly this right can be used for pilgrimage, connected with freedom to follow one s religion. Draw a circle for each right and mark arrows that show connection between or among different rights. For each arrow, give an example that shows the In every chapter we have done an exercise on reading the newspaper. Let us now try to write for the newspaper. Take any example from the reports discussed in this chapter or any other local example that you are familiar with and write the following: < Letter to the editor highlighting a case of human rights violation. < Press release by a human rights organisation. < A headline and a news item concerning a Supreme Court order related to Fundamental Rights. < Editorial on growing incidents of custodial violence. Put these together and make a newspaper for your school notice board.